Attaining
the dynamics
of growth
Glimpses from
ﬁve continents

Prepared by the
International Teaching Centre
Bahá’í World Centre

Bahá’í World Centre
April 2008

Contents

page

To the delegates attending the
Tenth International Bahá’í Convention . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
London, United Kingdom . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
Norte del Cauca, Colombia . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15
Bihar Sharif, India . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25
Tiriki West, Kenya . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 35
South Tarawa, Kiribati . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 45
Acceleration of Learning . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 55

To the delegates attending the Tenth International Bahá’í Convention
In just a few years, the intensive programme of growth has emerged as a powerful
means for the expansion and consolidation of the Faith on a large scale. Leading the
process of learning that impels progress are scores of clusters where the friends have,
through painstaking, systematic effort, come to understand how best to implement
the cycles of activity that constitute such a programme. So instructive is the experience
of these clusters, we asked the International Teaching Centre to choose one example
from each continent and prepare a document that would demonstrate at once the
diversity of conditions in which the believers everywhere are labouring and the
coherent vision that unites them as they advance the process of entry by troops. The
document consists of five case studies and a closing analysis. It is inspiring indeed,
and we commend it to your study.
While the case studies offer an impressive account of the activity in each cluster,
you will, we hope, not be content only to read the narrative but will try to identify
the principles, qualities, and approaches that have made possible the progress
achieved. What should become clear to you is how aptly the friends and institutions
in the clusters have managed to exploit the framework for action referred to in our
27 December 2005 message to breathe the spirit of Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation into places
as diverse as the crowded city of London and the tiny island group of Kiribati.
Immediately apparent from the description of all five clusters is the degree to which
the friends have relied on the power of divine assistance; this has fortified them in
the field of action and enabled them to persevere in the face of inevitable difficulties.
Equally evident is the sense of purpose that animates their endeavours—a purpose
complemented by the attitude of learning they have espoused. Even more striking,
however, is the way these attributes are perpetuated in the body of believers as it
grows in size, for in all cases they have come to characterize not only individual
action but also the community’s as a whole. So focused is the collective energy of
the friends as they carry out the central tasks of the Five Year Plan, whether in
taking individual initiative or participating in organized campaigns, that they are
catching the first glimpses of what it means for their powers to be multiplied in
unified action.
In reading the case studies, you will note how the approaches adopted and the
system of administration employed serve as means for facilitating the dynamics of
such unified action. In every cluster, fellowship and support are the watchwords in
this respect. Whether they are paying a visit to a family’s home to draw them into
a conversation about the Faith or helping one another to perform acts of service as
part of their study of the institute courses, it is the joy of accompanying other souls
on their spiritual journey that motivates the believers.

This same motivating force guides the institutions and agencies operating in the
cluster in their efforts to administer the intensive programme of growth. Clearly the
complexity of the coordination schemes in the five clusters varies to some extent.
Yet, irrespective of the level of complexity, the administrative mechanisms in place
represent a response to the desire of an increasing number of friends who are eager
to express the ardour of their faith in action; these provide them with the support
needed to participate in teaching teams, to host devotional meetings, to conduct
children’s classes, to form junior youth groups, and to establish study circles. That
the institutions and agencies involved are able to maintain such a responsive form
of administration testifies to the high degree of organizational skill and flexibility
they have attained.
In the closing analysis, the International Teaching Centre examines the strategies
being employed to transfer the experience gained in advanced clusters, such as
the five described here, to those in earlier stages of growth. The effect of such
transference has been remarkable. What sometimes required several years for the
friends in one cluster to accomplish can now be learned in another in a relatively
short span of time. Often within a matter of months, as pointed out by the Teaching
Centre, a dynamic pattern of activity, reflecting the equal emphasis placed on
the twin processes of expansion and consolidation, can be established. Invariably,
the believers take immediate ownership for the programme of growth, and unity
of thought is soon reached. As they begin to put into practice what they have
learned through the study of institute courses, especially related to direct teaching
methods, they see their efforts confirmed and preconceived notions about the lack
of receptivity fall away. Their commitment to the process of growth is raised to
higher and higher levels as they are drawn into decision making at the reflection
meeting. Plans laid down by the institutions and agencies serving the cluster
become increasingly effective as their ability to interpret the experience acquired
by the friends is gradually sharpened. They are able to think strategically, to set
priorities, and to use resources judiciously. Moreover, they identify believers capable
of shouldering added responsibilities in pursuit of plans and channel the energies
of growing numbers in service to the Cause. The community thrives as it lovingly
embraces new believers. In short, the process of capacity building in the three
protagonists of the Plan accelerates at a tremendous rate. It is this development
that heartens us most and which gives us confidence that the potential of the Five
Year Plan will be realized.
The Universal House of Justice
Rid. ván 2008

London
United Kingdom

London

United Kingdom
the experience of the
london cluster is a lesson in
mobilizing teaching teams
and transforming attitudes
to the expansion of the
Cause in what was deemed
an “unreceptive” area.
Like many other large cities, London had long
been seen as a place where it was especially difficult
to teach—in spite of the fact that a direct teaching project undertaken in the Hackney borough
between 1992 and 1997 clearly showed heightened
receptivity among the Afro-Caribbean, Turkish,
and Kurdish populations . Unfortunately, the
project lacked adequate means to deepen newly
enrolled believers and build community life .
Without enough active teachers and effective
strategies, only a handful of the significant numbers of individuals and families that entered the
Cause developed a strong Bahá’í identity .
In 2001, at the outset of the Five Year Plan,
London was divided into seven clusters . one
that showed particular promise for growth was
London City east, which included the site of the
Hackney project . Following consultations with
the Counsellors, the institutions and agencies
there decided to address the deficiencies of the
earlier teaching project by taking a campaignlike approach to raising up human resources
and by making specific plans that would allow
every willing individual to join a study group and
progress rapidly through the sequence of institute
courses . In that way, new believers would immediately assume a sense of responsibility for the
progress of the Faith and would themselves arise
to become active teachers .
When this approach was presented at a reflection meeting, the idea of an intensified effort met

Cluster at a Glance
 area 1,610 square kilometres
 largest city in western europe:
population 7.5 million
 over 40 percent of inhabitants belong
to “minority” groups, especially
africans, Caribbeans, and indians
 City divided into 33 boroughs
(local municipalities)
 Bahá’í community numbers around
1,000 with a high proportion of
friends from iranian background
 local Spiritual assemblies in 29 boroughs
 Second intensive programme of
growth in europe (april 2005)
 First Bahá’í in london was mary Virginia
thornburgh-Cropper, a member of the
first Western pilgrim group in 1898
 ‘abdu’l-Bahá visited in 1911
and again in 1912–13
 Site of the resting place of Shoghi effendi

Glimpses from five continents — 5

with a strong positive response. Within a few months, a company of some
30 believers, many of them young people, had successfully engaged friends of
the Faith in neighbourhood children’s classes, devotional meetings, and home
visits. This experience led the way for other clusters in London where the
believers were beginning to see the transforming effect of the institute process
on the work of expansion and consolidation.

Preparing and Launching the Intensive
Programme of Growth
In early 2005, the decision was taken to amalgamate London’s seven clusters
into one, the combined resources of which now made launching an intensive
programme of growth possible. The focus of the new Greater London cluster’s
first reflection meeting, held in preparation for the programme’s launch, was
twofold: to carry out a campaign of home visits and to identify potentially
receptive friends, family members, neighbours, and co-workers. The groundwork that was laid in this preparatory period proved critical to the success of
the programme’s early cycles.
Only weeks before the launch of the intensive programme of growth, a
cluster-level scheme of coordination was established. The Bahá’í Council for
England, in consultation with the Counsellors, appointed an Area Teaching
Committee, consisting of five friends with experience in the institute process.
A cluster institute coordinator was then named, as was the first children’s class
coordinator for the cluster.
Time was short, and much work lay ahead. To begin the programme,
friends who had completed institute courses would need to be strategically
mobilized. There had been some experience with seekers in core activities in
the past but not on the scale required. Would efforts to mobilize the friends
in the intensive programme of growth meet with success? The excitement felt
by members of the Area Teaching Committee was mixed with considerable
anxiety—feelings heightened by the knowledge that theirs was only the second
programme of growth in all of western Europe. There would be no examples
to follow along the way.
6 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

London
United Kingdom

The results of the first cycle of activity far exceeded expectations. More
than 150 believers participated in some way in the expansion phase, a noteworthy accomplishment, given how few had previously considered themselves
teachers of the Cause. The confidence of the friends was greatly boosted, and
the spirit at the well-attended reflection meeting was elevated, determined,
and galvanic.
The objective of the institutions and agencies serving in the cluster had been
to increase substantially the number of seekers involved in core activities, to learn
about teaching, and to witness some growth. The number of the friends of the
Faith engaged in core activities rose dramatically from 40 to 133, and six enrolled
as Bahá’ís. Without doubt, the possibilities for growth were significantly greater
than anticipated. But beyond the measurable results, it was clear that the friends
were becoming increasingly audacious in reaching out to people, using the tools
acquired from the training institute courses such as home visits and teaching
teams to shape their endeavours. As the account of their victories reverberated
in far off lands, the friends in London were further confirmed in their efforts.

Learning about Teaching Teams
From the outset of the intensive programme of growth in London, teaching teams have played a pivotal role in propelling the process. In general,
teams have focused on inviting people to core activities, which, of course, has
involved them in sharing the Message, to a greater or lesser extent in each case.
Much work was undertaken to prepare the initial teams for the first cycle of
activity in order to ensure success.
Like military strategists mobilizing an army, the cluster agencies with
the assistance of the Auxiliary Board members began by looking at the list of
believers participating in the institute process, especially those who had completed Ruhi Institute Books 6 and 7, and by identifying groups of friends living
reasonably close to one another who could form three- or four-member teams.
A potential coordinator for each team was contacted and asked about possible
members, and through such a process of consultation the first teams emerged.
The role of the team coordinators would later prove essential for ensuring the
flow of information, advice, resources, and encouragement between the large
numbers operating on the ground and the cluster agencies—a flow imperative
for this army of intoxicated lovers of Bahá’u’lláh to function properly.
A simple outline of what teaching teams would actually do was produced
and studied, first with the team coordinators and then with all members. The
Auxiliary Board members took the lead in this work, and because there was
little experience operating in teaching teams and only limited experience with
individual teaching, these concepts had to be carefully examined. The materials
aimed at underscoring one point above all else: the expansion phase was a time
to teach, and to teach with an intensity beyond any previous efforts. Of the
30 teams formed in the first cycle, perhaps 12 were effective in engaging their
contacts in core activities. Though concerned about the less effective teams,
the Area Teaching Committee was advised to be confident that the learning
from the most active ones would soon spread to others—an approach that
has been proven by the consistent increase in the number of effective teams
from cycle to cycle.
The stories from the teams during the first week—of overcoming fears,
making successful home visits to share prayers, teaching in small firesides,
Glimpses from five continents — 7

inviting colleagues to devotional meetings—reinforced many of the ideas they
had studied earlier and strengthened their appreciation for the new mode of
working. Excitement was palpable. Inspiring stories were collected and shared
to encourage others. They were also used in later cycles to advance the friends’
understanding through reflection on real experiences.
Confidence to teach the Faith to people the believers already knew was
a key attitudinal change that occurred in the early stages of the programme
and developed into new, more effective, habits over subsequent cycles. Many
believers initially felt inhibited, assuming that people in their immediate circles
would not be receptive. Through experience, however, teachers saw that when
they presented the Faith in a natural way, their friends, family members, neighbours, and co-workers responded positively with remarkable consistency.
As the teams entered the field of action, they experienced the immediate
power of prayer and began to rely on it increasingly—a habit that has been
strongly encouraged by the institutions, as a means both for attracting divine
assistance and for keeping in the forefront the immensely exalted and spiritual
nature of the enterprise. The plan for each cycle of activity continues to include
a special prayer campaign in which all are invited to take part.
With up to 50 teams spread across more than 30 communities in London,
it has been a challenge for the cluster agencies to keep in touch with them
to support their efforts. Yet the ability to work shoulder to shoulder with the
teams has gradually increased throughout the cycles, as the Area Teaching
Committee members have acquired personal experience and have themselves
become more confident in their approach to accompanying the friends in their
efforts. Likewise, the teams’ skills and understanding have also developed as
they have gained experience in the field. By the end of the sixth cycle, there
was a strong culture of inviting friends to Book 1 without hesitation.

Study Circles as Environments for Teaching
As in other places, study circles have offered a fertile environment for teaching,
but this potential has only gradually been realized as the friends have overcome inhibitions to teach. Experience has demonstrated that many barriers
are removed by studying Book 6. Several friends have even remarked that their
8 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

London
United Kingdom

habits of thought were so ingrained that they did not shed their inhibitions to
share the Message until they had served as tutors of the book a few times .
Further, some tutors have managed to establish a pattern of growth based
on the courses of the institute . These believers form study circles and assist
the seekers after the completion of each course to carry out the relevant core
activity with a growing network of friends of the Faith . By accompanying
participants in this way through the study and practice of Books 1 to 7, they
are able to systematically multiply the number of those who have the capacity
to help others become dynamic teachers of the Cause . The story of one tutor
illustrates the kind of transformation that can occur .

Vida facilitated her first study circle as the result of the efforts of a teaching team member who was
not yet enrolled in the Faith. the team member arranged a daytime study circle for eight mothers,
only two of whom were Bahá’ís, offering to take care of the children while Vida facilitated. Quite
nervous at the start, with the new participants looking at her expectantly, Vida later confessed, “i
could hear my own heart beating.” despite her nervousness, the first sessions went well; the participants were enthusiastic and her confidence quickly began to build. through her own efforts and
those of the auxiliary Board member and the cluster coordinators who accompanied her in the
field, Vida’s skills developed markedly. From her first study circle with mothers, a children’s class
naturally emerged. Several participants were nurtured and embraced the Faith through home visits,
firesides, and devotional gatherings. other teaching opportunities opened up as these individuals
began to move through the sequence of courses and, in turn, to teach the Faith, so that a pattern
of growth has now emerged. two years later, Vida is serving as a resource person—even travelling
to other countries where the believers struggle with certain tasks related to growth, accompanying
the friends in making home visits and helping them to confirm souls in the Cause. and the original
teaching team member formally enrolled in the Faith in the seventh cycle!

Glimpses of Growth
As a result of the efforts exerted by the believers in the London cluster, the
tempo of teaching is steadily gathering momentum . The table below provides
relevant statistical information from the first through the eighth cycle of activity, which concluded in January 2008 .
CyCle

1st

2n d

3r d

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

no. involved in teaching activities
no. youth and adults enrolled during cycle
total no. individuals enrolled during cycle
no. new believers entered in institute programme
no. seekers in core activities at end of cycle

156
10
12
10
133

106
9
12
7
124

147
10
12
7
120

115
6
6
3
128

129
8
9
6
150

143
11
12
11
140

114
10
10
10
180

75
8
8
8
131

It is noteworthy that 86 per cent of the youth and adult new believers have
entered the training institute process, and nearly half of these are active in the
teaching field . Several became members of teaching teams straight away—in
a few cases before they formally declared—and are regarded as some of the
most natural teachers . Without old habits or attitudes to discard, they see
training as an opportunity to gain skills to effectively share the Message they
have embraced, and so they respond with eagerness to invitations to undertake
Glimpses from five continents — 9

further study of the institute courses . on occasion, they even recall fondly the
cycle of activity during which they joined the Faith!

Decentralizing Children’s Classes
Before the launch of the intensive programme of growth, many of the children
from Bahá’í families in London attended one of the weekly centralized “community schools” held in three localities, to which parents living outside the city
brought their children as well . only one or two children from families where
the parents were not Bahá’ís attended these schools . Following a decision of the
National Spiritual Assembly, such schools were closed so that resources could
be focused on initiating neighbourhood classes that would be open to all .
It has been a slow and sometimes difficult process of transition to a culture
that places importance on extending Bahá’í education to children of all backgrounds . Yet, with experience, the value of neighbourhood classes has become
more and more apparent, and as the following story shows, the children from
Bahá’í families are not only developing a strong Bahá’í identity through the
classes but are also becoming agents of growth in a completely natural way .

Florence and Abigail

the openness of children and their natural ability to teach became
clear when Florence, one of the Bahá’í children, said to her friend, “We have no school tomorrow, because it’s a Holy day.” Her friend, an eager participant in Bahá’í children’s classes, told her
mother that she, too, would like to observe the Holy day. Puzzled, the mother called the children’s
class teacher, who explained that the Bahá’í children had permission to stay home from school on
this sacred anniversary of the Birth of the Báb, a manifestation of god. the mother, who was not
a believer or participant in any core activity, then called the school and gave permission for her
daughter to take the Holy day off, too. mother and daughter attended the Holy day commemoration,
and the child continues to be one of the most enthusiastic children in the class, firmly identifying
herself as a Bahá’í.
abigail, a six-year-old who was also attending Bahá’í children’s classes, decided to conduct a
devotional meeting at home for her parents. She invited them to sit on cushions she had prepared,
and she played some music. When daddy began to read his prayer too soon, she explained that
they must read their prayers in turn, with a pause between each one. abigail’s mother, who was
studying Book 1, was very touched by this experience with her daughter and soon after declared
her faith.

one young mother who was appointed as a children’s class coordinator
during the fifth cycle gained a good deal of experience in inviting neighbourhood children to her classes and in taking their parents through the sequence
of institute courses . She has seen the evolution in the friends’ understanding
of the nature of Bahá’í children’s classes and their place in a process of growth .
At first, conversations among Bahá’ís tended to revolve around whether it was
prudent to stop operating the centralized Bahá’í Sunday school . Then, with
the focus on working locally, conversations shifted to learning how to invite
children to classes and what to say to their parents . From there, consultations
moved on to the highly practical question of how to work with the many children who were attending the classes . How to invite the parents to core activities was the next stage . The question most pressing before the friends at this
10 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

London
United Kingdom
point is how to invite the receptive souls from among the parents to formally
enrol as Bahá’ís . The story of one mother’s efforts illustrates the tremendous
possibilities that open to those who step forward to teach children .

Julia started a regular children’s class with her daughter’s friends, whose mothers were also learning about the Faith from her, and gradually acquired the capacity to conduct classes themselves,
overcoming obstacles as they arose. one of the most welcome challenges was learning how to invite
her study circle participants to enrol in the Faith. She tells the story of one such experience:
“my friend and i got together after the first session of the Book 1 study circle. She had some
questions and as we consulted about them, she seemed to be trying to articulate something.
‘What makes us different? How is it that you are a Bahá’í and . . . and i’m not a Bahá’í? What is
the difference between you and me?’ i responded that i understood a Bahá’í to be someone
who accepts that Bahá’u’lláh has god’s message for today, and that being a Bahá’í is a realization that comes to our heart. at some point we realize that we believe. She responded, ‘But i
do believe that. i realized it almost the first time we spoke of it together.’
Julia has accompanied several of these mothers through Book 3 and beyond. they are now Bahá’ís,
conducting children’s classes and vigorously contributing to the process of growth.

of the 15 children’s classes in London, 13 include children from families
that are not Bahá’ís—and those involved are engaged in an intense process of
learning . As experience accumulates in forming junior youth groups, the coordinators for children’s classes and junior youth groups are finding that working
together ensures that these two core activities reinforce one another .
Glimpses from five continents — 11

Looking Forward
Eight cycles, spanning two and a half years, have seen the enrolment of 81 new
believers in London. The effect of this accomplishment on the members
of the teaching teams, most of whom had no previous experience with their
friends and families becoming Bahá’ís, has been profound. Yet, even with
intense prayer and effort, it is not proving easy to accelerate further the rate of
enrolments in London. A number of important challenges must now be met:
raising the number of effective teachers; ensuring that teaching in the expansion phase reaches the necessary level of intensity; supporting the work of the
teams adequately; and, above all, enhancing the ability to identify segments of
the general population with heightened receptivity to Bahá’u’lláh’s Message.
Until now the teaching teams have principally reinforced individual initiatives—albeit on an increasingly larger scale. The next frontier of learning is
collective action in the teaching field. In the eighth cycle, the introduction of
a special teaching effort aimed at receptive populations in selected neighbourhoods, engaging a few of the most audacious and experienced teams with a
higher level of organization, coordination, and intensity of action, has opened
up new prospects for growth.
When ‘Abdu’l-Bahá visited London in 1911, He told the friends that it was
the attractive force of their love that had drawn Him to that city. Furthermore,
He said, “In the world of existence there is no more powerful magnet than
the magnet of love.”1 Today, as the believers in London strive to share the
Divine Message with the diverse souls who now make up that city, they are
conscious that their success is directly related to the increasing ardour of their
all-encompassing love for their fellow citizens, who come from almost every

12 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

1

‘Abdu’l-Bahá in London: Addresses and Notes of Conversations (London: Bahá’í Publishing
Trust, 1987) p. 79.

2

Ibid., p. 66.

3

Ibid., p. 54.

London
United Kingdom

conceivable background.  Deep in the hearts and minds of the friends resonate
the Master’s words about the diversity he found among the Bahá’ís in London:
“You are all, of every race and creed, members of one family. The teaching of
Bahá’u’lláh constrains you to realize your brotherhood to one another.”2 Yet
they know, too, that goodwill is not enough for ‘Abdu’l-Bahá also advised
them, “These meetings here in London are good, the knowledge and the intention are good, but how can there be a result without action?” 3 It is through
their unflagging efforts in the Plan’s framework for action that the friends in
this cluster have found effective instruments to convey their ever-growing
measure of love for humankind.

Glimpses from five continents — 13

14 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Norte
del Cauca
Colombia

The meeting venue overflowed with some three
hundred adults, youth, junior youth, and children who had come to join in joyous celebration
and take part in serious and disciplined consultation, from all of which they would derive further
spiritual sustenance . As the friends separated into
groups according to the core activities with which
they were involved, the institutions and agencies
serving the cluster felt a deep sense of gratitude
to Bahá’u’lláh not only for the large turnout but
also for the high level of maturity demonstrated
by these active and dedicated souls .
The process of learning about expansion and
consolidation in Norte del Cauca reaches back
to the 1960s, when a small group of Bahá’ís from
other parts of the country started to visit the
area . Teaching methods gradually evolved that
enabled them to bring large numbers into the
Faith, and over time they developed a systematic approach to visiting newly enrolled believers
—now reflected in Book 2 of the Ruhi Institute
curriculum—in order to support them . It was
also during these initial years that social and
economic development projects, which would
have a tremendous impact on the region, began
to be established . of particular note were those
initiated by the Bahá’í-inspired organization
Fundación para la Aplicación y enseñanza de las
Ciencias (FUNDAeC) in an effort to elaborate and
implement the concept of a university for integral development .
In the years that followed, teaching efforts
became increasingly systematic, but the goal of

Norte del Cauca
ColomBia

at the end of october 2007,
the Bahá’ís in norte del Cauca
held a reﬂection meeting that
marked the close of their
cluster’s 10th cycle of activities.

Cluster at a Glance
 located in southwest region of
Colombia, just south of Cali, the
country’s third largest city
 Population approximately 235,000
 majority of inhabitants of african descent
 dominant religion Catholicism,
mixed with african traditions, giving
rise to religious syncretism
 Seven semi-urban towns and several
dozen rural village communities, divided
into seven municipalities, ranging in
population from 5,000 to 50,000
 region where the ruhi institute was born
 long history of learning about large-scale
expansion, as well as Bahá’í-inspired efforts
in social and economic development
 originally five clusters; amalgamated
into one in late 2004
 one of the first clusters to launch
an intensive programme of growth
in Colombia (February 2005)

Glimpses from five continents — 15

sustaining them from within the area itself by the local population remained
elusive. In time, the establishment of the Ruhi Institute would prove crucial
in raising up human resources for this purpose. In its early stages, however, the
Institute focused much of its efforts on bringing youth from all over Colombia
to a central facility for training, most often in the context of a year-of-service
programme, from where they would be dispersed throughout the country
to work in villages, carrying out what are now known as core activities. This
practice began to change at the start of the Four Year Plan in 1996 when the
guidance of the Universal House of Justice shed new light on Bahá’í experience worldwide with expansion and consolidation. Subsequent years finally
brought the internal development of human resources at the grass roots so
long hoped for. By 2005, 812 people had completed Book 1 in the sequence of
courses, 208 friends had been trained as children’s class teachers, 81 individuals
had completed Book 6, and 45 were actively serving as tutors of study circles.
From such a position of strength, the friends in the cluster launched their
intensive programme of growth, and the years since have ushered in a new
phase in the history of the Faith in the area. More than 1,500 people in Norte
del Cauca have now joined the Bahá’í community, raising the population to
4,300, including children, youth, and adults.
While teaching the Faith has never been difficult in the area, it is the
capacity within the cluster to balance and sustain the complex elements of
16 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Norte del Cauca
Colombia

a programme of growth that now makes a difference. Through three years
of continuous activity, the believers have acquired a greater consciousness of
their responsibility to contribute to creating the unique features of Bahá’í
community life—a consciousness that is evident in their level of enthusiasm;
in their concern for educating children and junior youth; in their desire to
receive training to carry out acts of service; in the degree of their participation
in the Nineteen Day Feast, Holy Day observances, and devotional meetings;
and in their eagerness to give to the Funds of the Faith. Reaching this point
has not been easy. It has required intense activity, punctuated by as many
moments of struggle as those of joy. Plans and organizational schemes have
often needed adjustment when results fell short of expectations, and the conditions of life in the area have posed persistent challenges to the believers.

Developing Human Resources
Despite the long history of teaching in Norte del Cauca, the first cycles of the
intensive programme of growth lacked emphasis on expansion, and attention
focused primarily on involving a higher number of the Bahá’í population in the
institute process. The initial 45 friends available to serve as tutors were able to
attend to close to 400 people studying the sequence of courses, and the ratio
has been maintained throughout subsequent cycles. However, the mobility of
the population in the cluster, especially of the youth, who often migrate to the
cities to find work, has made it difficult to increase the human resources residing in the area, as indicated by the table below. In fact, a substantial number
of those who have completed the books in the sequence are not reflected in
the table as they have long since left the cluster.
66

Book 7

94

81

Book 6

122

0

Book 5

59

122

Book 4

173

208

Book 3

282

271

Book 2

366

812

Book 1

953

Cycle 1		

Cycle 10

The challenge of working with such a mobile population has required
that the cluster coordinators be flexible in their approach. Most participants
take the courses in study circles, but they also have access to two- or three-day
intensive sessions offered at various sites on the weekends, especially for the
higher courses in the sequence. Those involved in study circles, sometimes in
coordination with other groups working through the same material, are also
encouraged to organize periods of intensive study for an afternoon, a full day,
or a weekend. This combination allows the system of delivery to be adapted
to participants’ availability.
The stories of two young women, Rosa Elena and Monica, illustrate how
the agencies operating in the cluster have learned to systematically identify,
prepare, and mobilize individuals who have become vital human resources.

Glimpses from five continents — 17

Rosa Elena

the cluster’s current coordinator for junior youth groups is rosa elena, a young
woman native to the area who participated in Bahá’í children’s classes and then a junior youth group
in Chalo, a small community with a population of 1,200. during the period of the first Five year Plan,
she was studying the sequence of institute courses. By the time the first cycles in norte del Cauca’s
intensive programme of growth began, rosa was offering a year of service with a close friend from
her community in a distant part of the country. When they returned, the two started to study rural
education at FUndaeC’s University Centre. Soon the coordinator for junior youth groups identified rosa elena as someone with the capacity to support the activities of the institute, particularly
junior youth groups. as a first step, the coordinator helped rosa to start her own group in Chalo,
accompanying her as she invited participants and visited their parents. From there, rosa began to
accompany others in forming new groups. For months, she worked closely with the coordinator to
learn the skills necessary to coordinate the junior youth activities of the cluster and animator training. By the time the previous junior youth coordinator left during the seventh cycle, rosa elena was
able to take over as the coordinator in addition to pursuing her studies.

Monica is a young woman who lives in the small community of yarumales. She first heard of the
Bahá’í Faith when the children’s class coordinator arrived at her house by mistake, searching for
local Bahá’ís who might be encouraged to start classes. all of the friends the coordinator had set
out to visit had either moved away or were unavailable, but monica showed interest in her description of a Bahá’í children’s class and responded positively to the offer to work with her in starting
one. With the help of the coordinator, monica was quickly able to study the necessary books in
the institute sequence and gain practical experience in teaching lessons. Weeks later, monica was
conducting the class in yarumales by herself. Seeing her strong interest in education, the coordinator encouraged monica to enrol in the undergraduate programme in rural education at FUndaeC’s
University Centre. during the first semester of her studies, monica declared her belief in Bahá’u’lláh
and became actively involved in Bahá’í activities in the cluster. She has continued her study of the
sequence of courses and is now working with the institute, accompanying others in their efforts to
form and sustain children’s classes. every other monday, she and a handful of others study with the
institute coordinators and consult on their endeavours to support the growth of institute activities.
the vitality of monica’s faith has spread to those around her, and in recent cycles of activity monica’s
mother and all of her siblings have become Bahá’ís.

Mobilizing the Friends to Teach
When the programme of growth was launched in Norte del Cauca in 2005,
some believed that the receptivity of the local population had diminished
since the 1960s and ’70s, and this, they thought, accounted for the slowness
with which expansion gathered momentum . However, as the cycles of activity
progressed and those who were taught the Faith responded enthusiastically,
this misconception dissipated . In fact, experience showed that not only were
people still receptive, but the Bahá’í Faith was viewed with admiration because
of its positive influence in the area over the years .
Although receptivity remained high and past teaching methods were still
effective, the institutions and agencies serving the cluster soon came to the
realization that the magnitude of the work demanded a more focused approach
18 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Norte del Cauca
Colombia
than had ever been previously adopted. They would need to learn how the
friends could best be mobilized to carry out regular teaching campaigns during the expansion phase of each cycle and how new believers could be rapidly
incorporated into community life.
Following a series of adjustments to plans and operations on the basis
of learning on the ground, viable organizational arrangements emerged.
Currently, in every local community where a teaching campaign is scheduled
to take place, one person is selected to organize activities. He or she is assisted
by one or two friends who are appointed for each cycle as cluster-level coordinators for the campaign. These coordinators identify a core group of teachers
for each community, consisting of both active teachers residing in the locality
itself and others from different parts of the cluster. Those who offer to participate in the effort during the reflection meeting are added to one such core
group. Information related to the campaign—the names of teachers participating each day, the number of individuals visited, and the names of those who
declare—is recorded by the coordinators in a notebook that is passed to the
Area Teaching Committee. At the end of the expansion phase, all those who
have participated gather to celebrate the result of the teaching efforts, share
stories, and reflect on their successes and the challenges they encountered. In
the most recent cycle, 90 people were present at this gathering.
With the current approach, a two- to three-member teaching team makes
a pre-arranged visit to a home. Equipped with a visual aid seen as a precursor
to the more extensive presentation in Book 6, the team members take about
thirty minutes to an hour to explain the essential aspects of the Faith to their
hosts. Since they hope to create an intimate spiritual relationship with those
with whom they converse, time is always made available for questions and
discussion. At the end, after having explained what it means to be a Bahá’í,
the teachers ask those present whether they would like to be part of the local
Glimpses from five continents — 19

Bahá’í community. Most of the believers in the cluster have come into the
Faith as a result of this invitation.
The individuals visited are not strangers to the Bahá’í community. At the
beginning of each cycle, the coordinators of the expansion phase, working
with the cluster agencies, make a list of the names of individuals suggested by
Bahá’ís in the cluster—many of whom are parents of youngsters who attend
children’s classes or junior youth groups or are friends of the Faith who participate in devotional meetings and study circles. On average, one out of every
three individuals who are taught the Faith accepts it, and most others remain
interested. The believers recognize that this success is, to a significant degree,
dependent on the highly charged spiritual atmosphere of the campaign.
The average number of people who currently participate in collective
teaching efforts for more than two days in each cycle is around 90. Others
teach on an individual basis or participate for a shorter period of time.
The immediate task following the expansion phase is to tend to the needs
of the newly enrolled believers. This is done in large part through study circles, junior youth groups, children’s classes, and devotional meetings, as well
as through systematically organized visits to homes during the consolidation
phase of every cycle. Most such visits are carried out by those studying the
second book of the sequence of courses, and it is generally expected that by
the time new believers have received five home visits, they will begin to feel
integrated into the community. While there is a longstanding tradition of
home visits in the area, the number of families reached per cycle—between
80 and 95—is still not sufficient. Efforts to increase this number are under
way. In each cycle, the Area Teaching Committee sets aside a day dedicated to
visits, encouraging community members to make a personal commitment to
continue calling on families and individuals throughout the rest of the cycle.

20 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Norte del Cauca
Colombia

Nevertheless, experience suggests that making such visits a distinct feature of
Bahá’í community life will require time as the friends are gradually assisted in
their efforts to understand better the dynamics of this activity.
Perhaps what has proven most effective are the efforts made to form study
circles with those who enrol during the expansion phase. A new believer,
working with the institute coordinator or with someone who can act as a
tutor, is encouraged to make a list of friends, family members, and neighbours who might be interested in participating in this activity. An invitation is
extended for them to learn about the institute programme, and a study circle
is then formed with those who express a desire to attend. Often a group of this
kind will advance through the study of several courses together. In the Norte
del Cauca cluster, this has become a means both for raising up new human
resources and systematically expanding the list of friends of the Faith, creating
the dynamics that perpetuate growth.

Multiplying Core Activities
The emphasis placed on the practice component of the institute courses, as
an integral part of their study, has had a considerable effect on the multiplication of study circles, devotional meetings, children’s classes, and junior youth
groups. Equally important have been the efforts exerted to accompany the
friends as they begin to consciously walk a path of service to the Cause.
When initial attempts were being made to expand the number of devotional meetings in the cluster, a member of the Area Teaching Committee
systematically visited individuals who had completed the first book of the
sequence and held workshops for all who were interested in starting their own
devotional gatherings. She also provided them with materials, helped them to
develop lists of people they could invite, and worked closely with each host.
As the number of devotional meetings grew beyond the capacity of one person
to coordinate in this way, the Area Teaching Committee began to think about
cluster activities in terms of four routes. Now the hosts of devotional meetings in communities on each route receive visits during one specific week, and
in some communities individuals serve as contact people to assist others in
starting devotional meetings. Regular contact with key people on the routes
has helped to identify believers with the potential to organize activities for the
cluster. And thus, a system is evolving to support individual hosts in various
communities without the direct involvement of the Area Teaching Committee
member in each one. Among the most essential lessons recently learned is that
devotional gatherings formed around families are more regular and long-lasting
than those organized by study circles or junior youth groups. The table below
shows the steady increase in participation in this activity over several cycles.
Cycle

1st

2n d

3r d

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

10th

No. devotional gatherings
No. participants

52
522

68
737

80
776

101
131
145
113
135
126
129
968 1,193 1,563 1,227 1,365 1,269 1,258

The number of children’s classes has expanded by working directly with
teachers in their own villages. As shown in Monica’s story, when the children’s
class coordinator identifies individuals with a particular interest or the capacity to teach children’s classes, she makes a special effort to help them advance
quickly through the necessary institute courses. She also accompanies them in
Glimpses from five continents — 21

their efforts to identify children to join their classes, to visit their parents, and
to carry out their first few lessons. She then continues to assist by providing
materials, support, and further training to the teachers.
When the classes are first offered in a locality, many begin with large
numbers of children—in fact, too many, in some cases—but this eventually
settles down. The nature of life in the area is such that the number of overall
participants has fluctuated since the beginning of the intensive programme of
growth, as seen in the table below. However, the number of regular participants
is gradually rising, and the Bahá’í community is now able to attend to the
educational needs of around 1,500 children. The current challenge is to reach
a point where there are separate classes for each age group in every village.
Cycle

No. children’s classes
No. participants

1st

2n d

3r d

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

10th

66
72
79
85
91
81
89
95
97
99
1,263 1,459 1,331 1,737 1,851 1,416 1,525 1,525 1,335 1,358

Longstanding experience in working with young people aged 12 to 15 in
Norte del Cauca has contributed significantly to their enthusiastic participation in junior youth groups, and the number of such groups has nearly doubled
since the early cycles of activity. The institutions and agencies in the cluster
have set a goal of having a totality of 1,000 junior youth benefiting from the
spiritual empowerment programme, in one or another of its three levels, at
the time of the close of the current Five Year Plan. Having experimented with
various ways of administering this core activity, the junior youth coordinator
currently works closely with several collaborators who accompany those serving
as animators in different communities in the cluster.
Cycle

1st

2n d

3r d

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

10th

No. junior youth groups
No. participants

24
236

30
312

32
336

35
344

37
378

39
407

38
400

38
400

42
413

44
429

A Spiritual Enterprise
Back in the joyful atmosphere of the Norte del Cauca reflection meeting, it
is clear that the believers do indeed have something wonderful to celebrate.
It is the achievement of a long-held, deeply cherished dream for their area:
to learn how to systematically develop the capacity of the friends who live
there—the capacity to administer a complex network of coordinators who
accompany hundreds of children’s class teachers, junior youth group animators, tutors of study circles, and teaching teams; the capacity to make decisions
through a process of action and reflection that gives the cluster’s organizational
structure a high degree of flexibility and enables corrections and adjustments
to be made to plans when difficulties arise; the capacity to translate a vision
of reality into coherent and consistent action that is leading the Bahá’í community towards substantial, sustainable levels of growth. All of this heralds
further cause for celebration in the years ahead.
But the believers in Norte del Cauca are keenly aware that these developments, important as they are, represent only the outer manifestations of
a far-reaching spiritual enterprise in which they are engaged—an enterprise
which, through the 30 years they have been walking this path, has gradually
22 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Norte del Cauca
Colombia
suffused the culture of their community with purpose and united them at
a profound level. They understand all
too well the forces of disintegration
at work in the world. They live them
in the context of Colombian society,
and they plainly see the immense
need for the transformation called
for in the Bahá’í Teachings. Their
spiritual development has moulded
their intellectual advancement to the
point where their analysis and understanding of the structures and forces
shaping society are now exerting
influence on the wider community in
which they live. Their conversation is
the spiritual conversation that flows
from the Writings, from the quotations deep in their memories and hearts, from the concepts that the institute
courses elaborate, and from the acts of service in which they engage. They are
aware of the Divine Hand that guides and sustains their efforts. They know
where they are standing. They know where they are going. And they know that
by remaining undeviatingly aligned with the guidance of the Universal House
of Justice, they will get there.

Glimpses from five continents — 23

24 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Bihar Sharif
India

Shravan, already actively serving as a tutor in his
own community, began visiting Palni weekly, but
he met with a cold response . The people were
suspicious of his intentions, asking him, “What
do you get from this?” and “How will we benefit
from doing what you are asking us to do?” Still,
Shravan persevered, and eventually he was able
to establish a study circle . Though he continued
to be treated with mistrust, he visited the village
regularly and worked with the study circle participants . Then the monsoon season arrived . The
stream separating Tetrawan from Palni flooded,
and the only way to cross it was to wade through
chest-deep water—which Shravan did . When the
villagers saw the degree of his commitment, their
attitude softened . The success of the study circle,
together with his spirit of devotion and service,
attracted many people to the Faith in Palni,
which now has a vibrant community with five
devotional gatherings and two children’s classes .
Shravan’s efforts also inspired other Bahá’ís in his
home village to become more involved in core
activities . Such sacrificial and active participation stands in marked contrast to the apathy that
pervaded the area only a decade and a half ago .
The Bahá’í community in Bihar Sharif has been
transformed from the grass roots up through the
acts of individuals such as Shravan, empowered

Cluster at a Glance
 located in the state of Bihar,
in northeastern india
 Population 1.2 million
 Predominantly rural
 about 1,200 villages, with
average population of 1,000
 two municipality towns:
Bihar Sharif and rajgir
 Panchayat is basic unit of civil
administration for groups of 10 villages
 economy primarily based on
agriculture and farm labour
 Bahá’í Faith introduced to
the area in the 1950s
 early site of large-scale expansion
and consolidation
 among the early clusters in india
to launch an intensive programme
of growth (march 2005)

Glimpses from five continents — 25

Bihar Sharif
india

responding to an appeal for
friends trained through the
institute process to assist certain
communities in the Bihar Sharif
cluster in india, Shravan decided
to devote his attention to Palni,
a village with virtually no Bahá’í
activity about four kilometres
from his home in tetrawan.

through the unified efforts of the institutions and agencies in the cluster. But
beyond this, what is most noteworthy is the capacity the community has
developed to administer large numbers of activities and to welcome into its
warm embrace growing numbers of seekers.

First Steps on the Path to Sustained Growth
Bihar Sharif was one of many places that experienced large-scale expansion
in India in the 1960s. The Faith was introduced to the area in the 1950s by a
dynamic woman named Rasoola, who taught and served the Cause steadfastly
even in the face of persecution and social boycott. During those years of intensive
teaching, local efforts were supported by visiting teachers. Successful teaching
projects opened many villages to the Faith, and a youth cultural group travelled
from village to village, proclaiming the Message of Bahá’u’lláh through song
and drama. Summer and winter schools, along with courses at the Permanent
Teaching Institute, served as the primary vehicles for consolidation, and though
they initially generated enthusiasm in the participants, they did not increase the
friends’ capacity to engage in a sustainable process of growth. In the 1990s the
area witnessed a gradual but steady decline in Bahá’í activity. Deepening efforts
did not stimulate or meet the needs of the Bahá’ís; the state-level institutions
were not able to support the communities, which led to a loss of focus; and
many active believers left the area for economic and other reasons.
The reinvigoration of Bihar Sharif was achieved through a series of steps.
In 2000, children’s classes were established by a few youth who had completed
the first three books of the Ruhi Institute in an intensive study. The following year, a simple plan to offer institute courses in three communities was
­created and implemented, giving the institute process a thrust in the area.

26 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Bihar Sharif
India

The process was further strengthened in 2002 when the first study circles were
started by a group of friends trained to act as tutors in a regional campaign.
The ­introduction of the reflection meeting came next. The primary instrument
for accelerating growth in Bihar Sharif, reflection meetings provided a venue
for planning institute courses locally and for sharing experiences, especially
among those serving as tutors; they galvanized believers like Shravan to action,
bolstered their enthusiasm, and strengthened their sense of ownership of the
process of growth that had been set in motion.
Soon all of these initiatives began to bear fruit. There was a gradual increase
in the number of children’s classes, and activities directed towards junior youth
were introduced. Devotional gatherings were recognized not only as occasions
for the spiritual upliftment of souls but also as portals to growth, and a special
campaign to multiply their number provided a major impetus to growth in the
cluster. Those attending devotional gatherings began to flow seamlessly into
study circles, and regular visits to the area by the Auxiliary Board members and
institute coordinator helped to maintain a high degree of motivation among
those serving as tutors. Eventually a scheme of cluster-level coordination took
shape, with the appointment of a cluster institute coordinator and an Area
Teaching Committee served by a full-time secretary. This contributed greatly
to a further multiplication in the number of core activities, and there was a
sustained increase in study circles from mid-2003 onwards.
By 2004, conditions seemed propitious for launching an intensive programme of growth, with 56 individuals having completed Book 7, 42 devotional meetings, 11 children’s classes, 13 junior youth groups, and 8 study circles.
The initial cycle of activity failed, however, to achieve most of its objectives.
Following reflection and consultation, the friends decided to try again. Their
new plan was more strategic. They identified several communities that would
receive particular focus during the upcoming cycle and categorized them
according to their strengths and potential. Members of the cluster agencies
Glimpses from five continents — 27

visited these communities to elicit their participation. The new cycle, which
came to be regarded as the cluster’s first, was then launched through a series
of community-based prayer meetings. While the planning for this cycle had
been better, it was too long—seven months—and little differentiation was
made between the expansion and the consolidation phases.
An acceleration in growth finally occurred in the second official cycle,
when the agencies began to calculate the capacity of the communities in the
cluster, as well as the receptivity of the local population, by reviewing relevant
statistical information from the previous cycle. As a result of this kind of
analysis, the friends in the cluster embraced the vision of integrating 1,000
new participants per year into core activities, placing emphasis on raising the
number of children’s classes and junior youth groups—a vision which they are
gradually transforming into reality.
72

Book 7

115

67

Book 6

159

19

Book 5

132

123

Book 4

248

145

Book 3

345

169

Book 2

411

337

Book 1

723

Cycle 1		

Cycle 8

Building a Pattern of Sustainable Growth
Through eight cycles of an intensive programme of growth, the friends in
Bihar Sharif have consistently advanced in their learning about how to manage large-scale expansion and consolidation, as the Bahá’í population in the
cluster has expanded from around 1,200 at the time of the launch to more than
2,100 by December 2007. In the process, the cluster agencies have developed
the capacity to address the challenges associated with administering the affairs
of large numbers.
Effective Teaching Teams. Throughout the cycles, there has been a steady rise
in the number of friends teaching at their own initiative and participating in
teaching teams, as well as in the number of communities opened to the Faith
through their efforts. With the support of the Auxiliary Board members and
cluster agencies, teams now teach intensively and systematically during the
expansion phase, and the increasing alignment of their approaches with skills
acquired through the institute process has boosted confidence. Teams have
become more and more successful at inviting seekers to core activities, and
over 70 per cent of the new believers have now entered the institute process.
Home visits have found a new purpose in addition to deepening: they have
become a potent teaching tool in this rural setting, and individuals and families
who receive home visits from a teaching team usually join a core activity by
the second visit.
Empowering Women. Historically, the percentage of women in the Bahá’í
community in this region of India has been low, at about 10–15 per cent, in
28 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Bihar Sharif
india

spite of many programmes conducted through the years to address the imbalance . In the Bihar Sharif cluster, however, efforts to reach out to women
—aided by the formation of a special teaching team—have been very effective .
The proportion of women in the Bahá’í community there has risen to over 40
per cent, and the confidence with which they participate in activities is evident
in the fact that they are directly responsible for about 25 per cent of the core
activities in the cluster . Women now ensure that their children attend Bahá’í
children’s classes, and young women are arising to serve as animators of junior
youth groups, becoming role models for the youngsters with whom they work .
The stories below illustrate the ways in which three women of the cluster have
courageously stepped forward to put into practice the knowledge, skills, and
insights they have acquired through their study of the institute courses .

Sarita, Anita, and Kiran

to address the challenge of low participation by women in Bahá’í
activities in Bihar Sharif, a small number of them from different parts of the cluster were quickly
prepared to act as tutors and assisted in initiating study circles with other women. one of these was
Sarita, who, after completing the study of Book 7, did something which, given existing cultural and
social practices in Bihar, bordered on the heroic: she went to her paternal village of daryapur and
started teaching the Faith there. She visited regularly and soon formed a study circle for women,
accompanying 16 of the participants through the sequence of courses. She continues to visit the
community, extending to her new spiritual sisters her loving support as they engage in core activities. another woman, anita, was so inspired by the study circle she attended in a nearby village that
she asked the tutor to visit her own village. as she progressed through the sequence of courses,
anita assisted the tutor in working with a group of women and supporting them in carrying out
core activities—which has led to the growth of a community in which the vast majority of adherents
are women. Kiran, an enthusiastic young woman from rajgir who has been trained as an animator
of junior youth groups, began a group in a school. it proved popular but brought opposition. She
addressed this challenge by approaching the principal and explaining the nature and the purpose
of the programme, after which the school gave its unqualified support.

Glimpses from five continents — 29

Increasing the Number of Devotional Gatherings. Devotional gatherings
were identified early on as key to the growth of the Faith in the Bihar Sharif
cluster, and so a campaign to multiply the number of this core activity was
initiated with the aid of 50 friends who had completed Book 1. They received
visits to help them understand the basic elements of devotional gatherings and
encourage their participation in the campaign. Volunteer hosts and supporters
were marshalled, and materials such as audio cassettes of Bahá’í devotionals
were provided. As a result, the number of gatherings rose from 8 to more than
50. This rapid growth had several positive effects: the life of the Bahá’í community was enriched and seekers were exposed to the Sacred Verses; a systematic approach for working with seekers evolved, with many progressing from
participation in devotional meetings to study circles, eventually declaring their
faith; participation of women and children in Bahá’í activities increased; and
the Message of Bahá’u’lláh was spread widely within the cluster. Throughout
the cycles, devotional gatherings in Bihar Sharif have continued to evolve and
expand. Organized in harmony with local culture, such gatherings feature
floral decorations, music, and simple refreshments. They have inspired the
friends, in many cases for the first time, to chant and memorize prayers and
selections from the Bahá’í Writings. By the eighth cycle, there were 190 regular
devotional meetings being held, with 1,520 participants.

Building Capacity in the Next Generation
The capacity of the cluster agencies in Bihar Sharif to administer the affairs of
large numbers is perhaps demonstrated best through the programmes for the
spiritual and moral education of children and junior youth, which together
now encompass some 1,600 participants, with about 900 children in 65 classes

30 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Bihar Sharif
India

and nearly 700 junior youth in 55 groups. While the friends in the cluster had
some experience in conducting children’s classes, the junior youth programme
was entirely new.
The conditions of this geographic region create a receptive environment
for the spiritual nourishment the Bahá’ís are offering. Bihar is an economically
depressed state, with more than 50 per cent of the population living below
the poverty line, and the illiteracy rate is one of the highest in the country, at
60 per cent. Village schools typically have two or three teachers for 200–300
students in all eight grades, and students who wish to continue their education beyond that level must travel elsewhere. The majority of the inhabitants
are Hindu, although 15 per cent of the population is Muslim, living in tightly
concentrated areas, and the strong influence of caste and religious prejudice
often leads to social tension and violence. Women are particularly disadvant­
aged. For example, there are no female teachers in the schools. There are also
issues of safety at stake. With all of these difficulties, it is no surprise that
outmigration is common.
In this milieu, the junior youth spiritual empowerment programme offers,
to growing numbers of participants, a unique framework of hope, in which
they can develop their powers of expression and thought, along with a moral
structure for their lives. And as they engage in this process, they are becoming
highly motivated, thus ensuring the future health and vitality of the Bahá’í
community and augmenting their capacity to transform the wider society in
which they live.
The expressions of hope and change here are simple and concrete but profound in their ramifications. First, groups are not separated by caste, religion,
or economic status. Second, the Bahá’í institutions have encouraged men to
send their daughters to junior youth groups and study circles, which has not
only benefited young women in the area but has created the opportunity
Glimpses from five continents — 31

for all family members to become active participants in community life . In
some cases, it has also transformed the way in which parents regard their
children . For example, when one family with four girls accepted the Faith,
the parents became increasingly aware of the need to develop the capacity of
their daughters, and as the story of Kiran illustrates, the programme has been
instrumental in equipping young women with skills to serve as animators of
junior youth groups . Indeed, programme participants of both sexes who have
gone on to study the institute courses often become enthusiastic contributors
to the development of core activities .

Rajive and Shankar

rajive was 13 years old when he joined the first junior youth group in
his village of Hargawan in 2003. His confidence and clarity of expression increased to a remarkable
degree throughout the three years of the programme, following which he moved on to study the
sequence of ruhi institute courses. after completing Book 5, he formed his own junior youth group
and quickly proved himself to be a very effective animator. rajive’s spirit of devotion and service
also inspired four of his friends to join the institute process, and they have now established two
children’s classes and four study circles and are among the most enthusiastic, active participants in
the process of growth in their village. Shankar is another youth who took part in the junior youth
programme and went on to complete the sequence of institute courses. He started his own junior
youth group, as well as a study circle, helping the participants to engage in the practices associated
with each book before he accompanies them through the next course. His efforts have contributed
to steady growth of the Faith in his village, which now has nine devotional meetings, four children’s
classes, three junior youth groups, and two study circles.

The objective of sustaining such a large number of participants is pursued
systematically, with the most capable animators raising capacity in others .
Resourceful animators assist junior youth with their homework, reinforcing
the sense of trust that has been established between them . Many junior youth
group participants move naturally into study circles when the animators continue to work with them as tutors of the institute courses . Strengthening the
service component of the programme for junior youth and integrating the
arts into their endeavours are the current priorities of the coordinator for this
activity . In Bihar Sharif, where the arts have not traditionally flourished, a
drama for each story in Walking the Straight Path has now been developed, and
a cultural group has promoted the programme through drama .
CyCle

1st

2n d

3r d

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

no. junior youth groups
no. participants

22
219

31
320

44
547

48
582

48
582

53
632

53
632

55
656

Collaboration and Empowerment
The transformation and empowerment of a continually expanding circle of
believers in the Bihar Sharif cluster is facilitated through plans that employ
available resources and encourage intimate collaboration at all levels . The cluster agencies readily adapt their plans to incorporate contributions made by
the friends at reflection meetings and frequently visit communities to evaluate and plan activities . They meet with Auxiliary Board members to share
32 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Bihar Sharif
India

up-to-date news, information, and statistics that will help them to integrate
new believers into study circles and assist participants in the institute courses
to carry out acts of service. The close collaboration among the institutions and
agencies in Bihar Sharif has created an environment in which the believers are
empowered to take initiative and act—a significant development in the social
context of the cluster. The shackles of preconceived limitations fall away as
all are called upon to arise and develop their capacities to serve. The potential
of such action is seen through the stories of people such as Shravan, Sarita,
Anita, Kiran, Rajive, and Shankar—and countless others who are receiving
training and stepping into the arena of service. And as they are transformed
individually, so, too, through their actions, is the society in which they live.
Today, the Bahá’í community in Bihar Sharif has developed a sophisticated
capacity to manage and sustain large-scale expansion and consolidation of the
Faith of Bahá’u’lláh, and it stands as a beacon of hope for any soul who wishes
to enter within the ever-widening circle of its radiating light.

Glimpses from five continents — 33

34 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Tiriki West
Kenya

the seeds of the Faith were
sown in the receptive soil
of tiriki West as early as
1959. Shortly after the first
believers there embraced the
Faith, intrepid pioneers and
travelling teachers went on
foot from village to village
throughout the area, . . .

Cluster at a Glance
 located in the Vihiga district of the Western
Province of Kenya
 Population approximately 76,370; about
4 percent are Bahá’ís
 largely rural area
 inhabitants mainly from the luhya tribe
(90 percent), followed by the Kalenjin and
luo tribes
 economy based on agriculture—mixed
farming, livestock, and poultry on small
plots of land
 dominant religion Protestantism, with
muslim minority
 Bahá’í Faith first introduced in 1959; rapid
expansion to over 5,000 believers by 1962
 early focus on education
 First cluster to launch an intensive
programme of growth in Kenya
(January 2005)
 Forty-two local Spiritual assemblies

Glimpses from five continents — 35

Tiriki West
Kenya

 .  .  . inviting the local inhabitants to join them
in the celebration of this new Day of God—and
met with a very warm welcome . In those first
teaching projects and campaigns, visiting friends
would gather the believers to pray and deepen
in the Writings, directing the joy and energy
generated into door-to-door teaching by teams
of four or five . Newly enrolled believers were
invited to join an evening programme or attend
a conference held at the end of the project or the
campaign . Teaching the Faith has been a main
area of focus for the Bahá’ís of Tiriki West ever
since; another has been the promotion of education . The adult literacy classes and pre-schools
that were established in Bahá’í Centres to serve
the population of the area produced two major
effects . First, the Bahá’í community’s encouragement of education—particularly of the girl
child—earned it a good reputation in the wider
society, even though most of the early efforts
were not sustained because of a lack of human
resources . Second, the emphasis placed by Bahá’í
schoolteachers and literacy facilitators on maintaining upright conduct and promoting sound
family life, especially among men, attracted
many women to the Cause . Today, this cluster
has the highest proportion of women believers
in the country .

Developing Human Resources
Throughout those decades, Tiriki West faced a challenge common to many
other areas where large-scale expansion took place: While the local population was very receptive to the Bahá’í Teachings, consolidation became a major
hurdle as the number of believers grew. Pioneers and
travelling teachers could not satisfy the demand, and
many people drifted away from the Faith. Clearly,
dedicated and capable workers needed to be raised up
from within the area, but how could this be done?
When the Universal House of Justice called for
the development of human resources through training
institutes in 1996, efforts were initially made to create
a national course of study, but these efforts did not
bring the desired results. In 1999, after consulting with
the Counsellors, the National Spiritual Assembly of
Kenya decided to adopt the Ruhi Institute materials.
Some three years later, six believers from Tiriki
West attended an intensive session in Uganda to prepare them to act as tutors of these materials. They
returned home and conducted centralized courses throughout the area, while
additional friends were eventually raised up to serve in this capacity through
institute campaigns.
In January 2005, an intensive programme of growth was launched, and the
development of human resources has progressed unabated through nine cycles.
One of the greatest indicators of success has been the significant increase in
participation in the higher courses, as shown in the table below. The desire to
raise the number of tutors and junior youth animators, seen as key to sustaining and accelerating growth, was a strong force behind this increase.
54

Book 7

131

85

Book 6

154

0

Book 5

81

120

Book 4

227

171

Book 3

275

297

Book 2

434

798

Book 1

953

Cycle 1		

Cycle 9

Over the course of these cycles, the institute gradually decentralized training, and at this stage all courses are now offered through local study circles, as
the table below indicates.
Cycle

1st

2n d

3r d

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

No. study circles
No. participants

24
147

37
202

31
182

28
94

36
125

29
125

32
192

31
153

44
163

As in other places, the practice element of the institute courses was overlooked initially, and efforts directed towards the wider community were lacking
36 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

in the cluster . Gradually, this shortcoming was amended, and soon seekers,
friends, and relatives of Bahá’ís were invited to join study circles, as well as
other core activities, making these activities effective instruments for sharing
the Message .

Gathering Together in Joy and Reverence

the inviting and engaging Holy day observances in tiriki West have had a great effect on the core activities—especially children’s classes and
junior youth groups. the commemorations clearly demonstrate the attractiveness of a vibrant community life to all who attend and have therefore become a potent teaching tool, at which seekers
have expressed their desire to learn more about the Faith and have invited Bahá’ís to their homes,
subsequently enrolling and/or joining core activities.
With their joyous and welcoming atmosphere, these day-long celebrations are a powerful magnet for people from all walks of life. Venues are beautified with ﬂowers to proclaim to everyone the
significance of the day, and friends from outlying areas of the cluster arrive singing praises to god,
attracting large crowds as they approach. each observance begins with stirring prayers and readings
related to the occasion and then moves on to uplifting and captivating artistic performances. People
of all ages—men and women, youth, junior youth, and children—offer dances and dramatic pieces,
recite from the Holy Writings, narrate stories about the Central Figures of the Faith, and sing original
songs. and although the programme goes on for the whole day, sometimes even then there is not
time for all of the participants who wish to contribute.
to provide an opportunity for the friends to express their faith artistically, an arts festival has
been established in the cluster, at which all performances are based on Bahá’í Writings, and some
of these are then presented at the Holy day observances. organized by the cluster agencies, the
festival is held on a rotational basis throughout the cluster to give different communities a chance
to host.

Learning about Teaching through Cycles of Activity

Tiriki West
Kenya

During 2003–2004, Tiriki West underwent pre-launch preparations for the
intensive programme of growth that would soon commence . The Auxiliary
Board members and cluster agencies met to analyse the stage of development
of the cluster and to identify available human resources . Activities were then
initiated to establish a rhythm that would help the institutions and believers
to become systematic in the process of consultation, action, and reflection, so
crucial if they were to adopt the posture of learning needed . Teaching teams
were formed, intensive consultations were held to prepare for the first cycle, and
a core group of believers was put in place . The initial plan was presented at a
reflection meeting, which was attended by well over 300 friends, prompting the
cluster agencies to create three zones so that specific details could be elaborated
by those residing in each one . The first cycle was launched in January 2005, and
the careful preparations bore fruit . Collaboration between the institutions and
agencies in the cluster was close, and there was a high degree of ownership of the
growth process, which no doubt helped to bring about the 151 enrolments .
Nine cycles of activity in the cluster have resulted in an average of 56
enrolments of youth and adults, as shown in the table below . on average 17
new friends have entered the institute programme each cycle, while eight have
completed the current sequence of courses . Wherever possible, new believers
Glimpses from five continents — 37

not participating in study circles have been integrated into other core activities.
Throughout these cycles, much has been learned about the nature of teaching. Challenges have included a lack of intensity during expansion phases; the
scheduling of expansion phases at the same time as traditional festivals, which
proved to be great distractions from teaching activities; and the outmigration
of human resources to urban areas in search of employment. Lessons have also
been learned about direct teaching methods. Notably, an emphasis on the use
of “Anna’s presentation” in Book 6 during the most recent cycles has improved
the effectiveness of teaching efforts.
Cycle

1st

2n d

3r d

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

Number of teams
Teachers mobilized
Campaign enrolments
Total enrolments*

31
155
124
151

31
120
66
66

31
195
22
22

31
175
65
76

31
210
21
21

31
230
25
25

31
150
29
29

30
150
54
54

24
120
38
61

*	These figures only account for adults and youth; children and junior youth of new Bahá’í families participating in core activities are
not included.

Learning about Teaching Teams
During the initial cycles, three- to five-member teaching teams were formed
in reflection meetings, each led by a friend who had experience in serving as
a tutor and who could convene team meetings to devise systematic teaching plans. Some teams were assigned to visit and teach seekers participating
in core activities as well as parents of children and junior youth involved in
classes and groups, all of whom had been identified by the cluster agencies.
Other teams taught door to door in selected villages; yet others visited schools
and dispensaries. The week before the two-week expansion phase, devotional
meetings and Book 2 and 6 refresher courses were held to inspire the friends.
Then, during the expansion phase, the teams visited their assigned villages on
their own schedules. No specific goals were set.
38 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

As a result of these early experiences with the teaching teams, a number of
valuable lessons emerged, leading to certain changes in approach. Among the
most important lessons were the following: 1) the continuity of the teams is
important if connections with the seekers and the newly enrolled believers are
to be maintained; 2) team members should live close to one another and should
include those trained to serve as tutors, children’s class teachers, and junior
youth animators who can start different activities during the consolidation
phase; 3) teaching teams are more effective when they set specific goals before
each phase; and, finally, 4) although refresher courses can help to prepare the
teaching teams, they need to be accompanied and assisted to overcome obstacles encountered during the cycle. Further, as the end of the cycle is too late
to make adjustments, the Auxiliary Board members and cluster agencies have
begun to schedule midpoint meetings with the team leaders during the expansion and consolidation phases to accommodate the learning taking place.

Children and Junior Youth

Tiriki West
Kenya

Providing spiritual education to Bahá’í children has long been a strength of
the Kenyan community and has laid a solid foundation for current progress.
When Tiriki West’s programme of growth was launched, there were 171 trained
teachers and 93 classes with 557 children. By the end of the ninth cycle, there
were 131 children’s classes with almost 1,000 participants.
Throughout the cycles of the growth programme, understanding and practice have advanced on three main points: inclusiveness, regularity, and ­continuity.
Now the Bahá’í community reaches out confidently to the wider society and
offers classes to children from all backgrounds in the villages scattered across
the cluster. The institute process has given rise to a cluster-wide network of
trained teachers who approach this service more systematically than ever before,

Glimpses from five continents — 39

which has affected the regularity of classes . And the institutions and agencies
operating in the cluster have learned that the progression of participants from
children’s classes to junior youth groups to the study of the main sequence of
courses is smoother when their teacher accompanies them from year to year .
This was evidenced in March 2007 by the graduation of 100 children into the
junior youth programme and 40 junior youth into the sequence of courses
after having been accompanied in this way . Seventeen of these junior youth
have already enrolled in the Faith, while home visits are being made to follow
up with the others .
As the demand for children’s classes has grown, a scheme for accompanying
the teachers at all levels to increase their capacity and to mobilize them has
steadily evolved . The cluster agencies also try to ensure that enough teachers
rise up in each cycle to meet the need for more classes . Junior youth are now
encouraged to work closely with children’s classes while proceeding through
their own programme, in the expectation that they will eventually become
children’s class teachers .

Parents’ Awareness Workshops

Since experience has shown that the involvement of
parents in their children’s education is essential if classes are to be sustained, the cluster coordinator for the classes organizes parents’ awareness workshops to familiarize them with the curriculum
and appeal for their assistance by creating a learning environment at home. Home visits are used to
discuss their children’s character and behaviour, and parents are invited to presentations made by
the children. Similar workshops are also conducted for parents of junior youth in the cluster, who
are invited to a central venue where the junior youth make presentations based on what they have
learned in the groups, showing how such learning can help them make concrete decisions in life.
Passages from letters written by the Universal House of Justice, or on its behalf, relevant to children
and junior youth are shared, and questions answered.

40 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

The designation of junior youth groups as the fourth core activity in
December 2005 focused greater attention on those in this age range, and the
number of animators of junior youth groups in Tiriki West has jumped from
5 to 81. The number of groups and participants, most of whom are from families that are not Bahá’ís, has also increased dramatically, as seen below. Many
have been attracted by the acts of service performed by their peers in groups.
1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

No. junior youth groups
No. participants

4
34

6
57

9
109

16
208

20
232

22
272

34
418

49
613

53
631

Tiriki West
Kenya

Cycle

Glimpses from five continents — 41

The current coordinators of children’s classes and junior youth groups
grew up attending Bahá’í classes and participating in junior youth groups and
study circles . When the present junior youth coordinator was appointed, other
youth were raised up to conduct his children’s class and assist with his two
well-established junior youth groups when he is away from his community
visiting other animators . The availability of such capable replacements is an
indication of the extent of human resource development among the youth
in the cluster .

Youth in the Vanguard

Wycliffe, Patrick, Vahid, godfrey, and linhanda are just a few of
the outstanding youth in the tiriki West cluster. raised in Bahá’í families, they have gone through
children’s classes, junior youth groups, and the main sequence of courses, becoming animators,
tutors of study circles, and tutors for a Bahá’í-inspired social and economic development programme
called Preparation for Social action (PSa). they have offered service as travelling teachers to other
clusters in Kenya in the early stages of development, assisting new believers to study the institute
courses over a weekend. on the recommendation of institutions of the Faith, they will soon serve
for two years as homefront pioneers with the goal of opening up certain clusters.

42 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

As in the case of tutors of study circles, the migration of animators to
urban centres in search of employment has affected the sustainability of junior
youth groups in Tiriki West. In response to this situation, additional animators are being trained so that they will be able to step in whenever they are
needed. Some Book 7 participants are being encouraged to enter this field of
service as well.

Reflecting Back, Looking Ahead

Tiriki West
Kenya

Today Tiriki West is harvesting the fruits of learning about teaching the Cause
and educating children, the seeds of which were sown so many decades ago.
Since 2005, the number of Bahá’ís known to the institutions in the cluster has
grown from 1,955 to 3,056, and the steady expansion of children’s classes and
junior youth groups, in particular, holds the promise of future victories.
Key to the cluster’s progress is the unity of thought and strong collaboration at all levels among the institutions, the agencies, and the friends. Flexibility
has also been crucial, as experience has taught lessons about managing growth,
and the scheme of coordination and functioning of the cluster agencies has
evolved organically with the multiplication of core activities.
The foundation for further progress in this cluster has been solidly laid
through patient, consistent, and unified action, and the receptivity of the
population will surely generate even higher levels of growth. In coming cycles,
attempts will be made to intensify teaching through well-conceived, collective
action that will enhance the community’s capacity to embrace eager souls. The
vibrancy of Tiriki West’s spiritual health grows with each wave of enrolments,
filling the friends with a deep spiritual joy and sense of purpose as they strive to
contribute in ever-increasing measures to the well-being of the wider society.

Glimpses from five continents — 43

44 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

South Tarawa
Kiribati

Cluster at a Glance
 located on the southern arm of tarawa,
one of 33 atolls forming the nation of
Kiribati in the South Pacific ocean, about
halfway between Hawaii and australia
 official language: english

As the youth began to sing Bahá’í prayers and readlocal language: i-Kiribati
ings, the beautiful music wafted to the neighbours
(formerly gilbertese)
on the warm Pacific breeze . Moved by the beauty
 Population 40,000–45,000 (about half
of the words and melodies, they were drawn like
of the total population of Kiribati)
moths to a flame, and the devotional gathering
 main villages are ambo, Bairiki, Betio,
was transformed into a teaching opportunity .
Bikenibeu West, and Bonriki, all located
The I-Kiribati people have been receptive
along a 29-kilometre strip of road
to the Bahá’í Teachings ever since the Faith was
 Centre for government and main focus
first introduced to these islands by Knights of
of trade and commerce in Kiribati
Bahá’u’lláh Roy Fernie and elena Marsella in
1954 . Various teaching campaigns over the years
 Bahá’í population 1,343
brought sizeable numbers of enrolments, but
 Bahá’í Faith is the fourth largest
challenges always arose with deepening and
religious community, after Catholic,
capacity building . In the past, veteran teachers
Protestant, and mormon
who knew the Bible well would visit the villages,
 intensive programme of growth
bringing the glad tidings of the return of Christ
launched in January 2005
and the fulfilment of prophecy . However, they
were often not able to revisit and nurture the
many souls who had embraced the Cause, and
most of the new believers gradually returned to their churches to worship . As
the years passed, many approaches to teaching were tried . In the mid-1990s,
believers in the villages were encouraged to arise and teach using methods
in harmony with I-Kiribati culture and traditional performing arts . But still
the problem remained: How could the believers be deepened in their newly
acquired faith? How could the capacity to carry out the needed deepening be
developed in the local friends?
Glimpses from five continents — 45

South Tarawa
KiriBati

one Sunday afternoon in
eita village in the South
tarawa cluster of Kiribati,
a group of youth gathered
for a devotional meeting
at a Bahá’í home in
the family compound’s
maneaba, a simple
traditional structure with
a thatched roof supported
on posts with no walls.

Developing Human Resources
The answer to the all-important question of human resource development
arrived with the institute process. Kiribati’s national institute, established in
1996 and named after Knight of Bahá’u’lláh Elena Marsella, initially offered
intensive courses using its own materials, adding the Ruhi Institute curriculum
in 1999. The following year, seven Bahá’ís from Kiribati, including three from
South Tarawa, travelled to Australia for a one-week session to study Book 1
in English. A few months later, a knowledgeable and experienced individual
from the Philippines came to Kiribati to conduct a second session, providing
South Tarawa with its first contingent of believers able to facilitate the study of
Book 1, and the institute began to focus solely on the Ruhi Institute courses.
It was clear that translation of the books into the I-Kiribati language was
crucial if large numbers of the friends were to proceed through the sequence
of courses. While the translation process had the disadvantage of slowing
down efforts to increase human resources, the institutions knew that it would
eventually bring a much greater advantage: it would make the institute pro­
cess accessible to the majority of the people of Kiribati and foster a sense of
ownership at the grass-roots level of the community.
With this in mind, the institute in Kiribati vigorously began the translation work. By May 2001, Books 1 and 2 were translated; study circles were
immediately formed. The translation of Book 3, completed in December 2001,
was eagerly awaited by those who wanted to serve as children’s class teachers.
Book 4 was available the following year, Book 6 at Rid.ván 2003, and Book 7
the next December. Study circles began promptly as each book was translated,
reviewed, and printed. Throughout this effort, the pool of human resources
steadily grew, augmented by widespread study of guidance from the Universal
House of Justice. With the translation of all the available books completed,
the institute was ready to raise up South Tarawa’s first cohort of tutors, which
it did through a series of intensive campaigns. By Rid.ván 2004, 48 people had
completed the study of Book 7. As the level of activity increased, the institute’s
national coordinator began to serve full time, while continuing as the coordinator for the South Tarawa cluster, where human resources were developing

46 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

rapidly. By January 2005, when the first cycle of the intensive programme of
growth was launched in the cluster, 74 people had completed the sequence of
courses up to Book 7, and the number of friends capable of acting as tutors
has continued to rise over time.

Youth Spearheading the Teaching Work

South Tarawa
Kiribati

The vitality and creativity of the youth have been key to the advances made in
the South Tarawa cluster, and more and more of these vibrant souls have moved
to the forefront of the teaching work as the intensive programme of growth
has progressed. By the sixth cycle, many newly enrolled young people who
had studied the sequence of courses in institute campaigns were spearheading
Bahá’í activity. With guidance and encouragement, youth have become adept
teachers who are creative in inviting people to core activities.
An institute campaign launched in August 2006 to assist a group of youth
in studying the seven courses of the institute sequence was instrumental in
galvanizing them. Dignitaries and special guests attended the completion
­ceremony, at which one town council member lauded the efforts of the Bahá’ís
in promoting moral and spiritual leadership. He called the programme “the
medicine for the social sickness that is affecting the youth” and encouraged the
Bahá’ís to approach the council for any help they might need. Such recognition
from government officials, seen as an endorsement of the institute’s vigorous
approach to making its programmes available to the wider community, greatly
bolstered the believers.
Glimpses from five continents — 47

Youth Testimonials

at a reﬂection meeting in South tarawa, a number of youth arose to
speak about their experiences in the teaching field as a way of encouraging adults who perhaps
wished to teach the Faith but were hesitant to arise. this is what some of the youth had to say:


“i only declared recently, and during my attendance at the youth conference in Betio during
which we studied the various ruhi books, it was like i got a new spirit and new strength. When
i started to teach in houses, fear and aloneness disappeared.”



“i was afraid when i first ventured out onto the field of teaching, in spite of all my preparations,
but when i remembered ‘abdu’l-Bahá’s words, ‘do not look at thy weakness and impotence; nay,
look at the power of thy lord, which hath surrounded all regions,’ my fear quickly evaporated
and i arose to teach.”



“i am just a youth, and i didn’t know what to say. i was afraid. as well, i had never done any
teaching before, but when i arose to teach, i discovered strength and confidence, and i was
able to talk to people.”



“i, too, was afraid, and mostly i would not talk to people, but after the training i could arise and
start my teaching. now i can speak.”

The involvement of the youth in the teaching work has sparked enthusiasm
among the older generations . Though many veteran believers were at first sceptical about the approach to teaching adopted by the young people, attitudes
were transformed as more and more long-standing Bahá’ís studied the sequence
of courses and stepped into the field of service . The story of the shipbuilders
that follows is just one of many that have spurred the friends on .

48 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

The Shipbuilders

South Tarawa
KiriBati

two Bahá’ís in South tarawa were holding a fireside during the lunch break
at the shipyard where they worked. they began in the same way that Bahá’ís have taught the Faith
here for many years: by reading quotations from the Bible to explain the coming of Bahá’u’lláh. a
large crowd of shipbuilders sat listening, and although there were a few questions, the audience
was mostly quiet until the biggest and roughest-looking shipbuilder of them all spoke up. “We have
heard all about the Bible before,” he said. What they really wanted to know about was Bahá’u’lláh.
Who was He? the Bahá’ís looked a bit embarrassed and persisted with their Bible-based explanations. again the man interrupted them and repeated that they wanted to hear about Bahá’u’lláh.
at this point, a Bahá’í woman who had completed the seven institute courses came forward and
told the story of the dream of Bahá’u’lláh’s
father about the ocean and the fish. She also
talked about the ruhi institute books and
how people can learn more about the life
of Bahá’u’lláh and His teachings by studying them. the shipbuilders sat and listened
intently, and when she finished, the man
who had spoken smiled and thanked her,
saying that was exactly what he had wanted
to hear. now, could he please join one of
these ruhi books?

Glimpses from five continents — 49

As illustrated by the shipbuilders’ story, women have become especially
audacious in their efforts to put the learning acquired from their study of the
institute courses into practice, raising the tempo of teaching further . From
the launch of the intensive programme of growth, the cluster agencies have
focused on encouraging women to form teaching teams and visit homes in
their neighbourhoods . The story of a team of women in Betio, highlighted
here, speaks for itself .

A Life Transformed

during the expansion phase of the second cycle, a team of women in
Betio had set out to meet people and teach the Faith. during this endeavour they encountered a
homeless man who was living in degraded circumstances. the women, who were not distracted
by his dishevelled appearance, engaged him in conversation about the Bahá’í teachings. as a
result, he joined a study circle that was working through Book 1. Within four months, he enrolled
as a Bahá’í, studied all the books in the sequence, and became an active teacher of the Faith. one
day he appeared at the national Centre carrying only a pillowcase and a request for 30 copies of
Book 1—one for each person to whom he had taught the Faith and invited to join the study circles
he had established. the contributions of this man, completely transformed in manner and appearance, encouraged and inspired everyone at the reﬂection meeting that launched the next cycle.

Reflection Meetings
one of the distinctive features of the South Tarawa cluster is the way in
which the institutions and agencies there have learned to use reflection
meetings as an effective tool for mobilizing teachers . Large, extended gatherings are a popular feature of village life in Kiribati, so reflection meetings have naturally become important occasions to create unity of vision,
generate enthusiasm, focus attention on priorities, and make short-term
plans of action . By the second cycle, refresher courses on Books 2 and
6, including both study and practice, were integrated into the reflection
meetings—which were extended to two or three days, with entire families
coming and staying for the duration . By the sixth cycle, the programme for
the reflection gathering included a period set aside for teaching . The first
evening was dedicated to celebration . The next day was devoted to review
and analysis of the cycle ending, the presentation and discussion of goals
for the coming cycle, and a workshop focusing on Book 6 . on the third
day, the friends formed small teams and visited homes in the village to
practice their teaching skills, reconvening at the meeting house afterwards
to share their experiences and make their own teaching plans . Invariably,
new believers, many of whom enrolled after participating in study circles,
contribute greatly to the consultations at reflection gatherings, testifying to
the effectiveness of study circles in raising consciousness .
Keeping accurate statistics in a cluster with an extremely mobile population and many villages where communication is hindered by the lack of
telephones and postal delivery has been a tremendous challenge . However,
cellphones now allow for faster, more frequent, and more reliable communication among the cluster agencies and institutions, while the introduction of
broadband and voice over Internet connections facilitate improved access to
sources outside the country .
50 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

Involvement of Local Spiritual Assemblies
In Kiribati, the traditional culture places high value on obedience and respect
for a recognized authority, and the support of Local Spiritual Assemblies was,
from the outset, seen as crucial to the achievement of any goals in South
Tarawa. Yet how could individual initiative be exercised in a community in
which the believers looked to the Assemblies to approve every one of their
actions? Individual believers were unsure of the scope of freedom available to
them to take initiative, while Local Assemblies were uncertain of their role in
the new dynamics emerging. It was eventually found that study circle participants remained active when their efforts were encouraged by a Local Spiritual
Assembly and when there was good collaboration among the institutions and
agencies functioning in the cluster. In villages where Local Assembly members
were involved in the institute process and were gaining experience with core
activities, Assemblies were able to assist in mobilizing participants into institute campaigns. To encourage such involvement and enhance collaboration,
the National Spiritual Assembly arranged for one of its members, along with
the national institute coordinator, to meet with all of the Local Assemblies in
South Tarawa, which helped them to understand the role of the institute in an
intensive programme of growth and to see how they could support its activ­
ities and work effectively with the institute coordinator and Auxiliary Board
members and their assistants.

Junior Youth Groups

South Tarawa
Kiribati

Reaching junior youth with a programme for their moral and spiritual empowerment is without doubt the most dynamic process being systematically pursued in the South Tarawa cluster, and it is becoming increasingly clear that
the programme, launched in 2004, has the potential to contribute to the
empowerment of an entire generation in this tiny archipelago.
The first four junior youth groups were established in the villages by young
people operating under the guidance of the Elena Marsella Institute. One
animator reported, “Most of my group are from Christian households. Before
starting my junior youth group I went to visit all the parents with my books
and I explained to them what their children in the group would be taught.
When they understood what I was teaching, they were happy for their children
to attend my lessons.” Teams of women carried out the same kinds of visits
in another village and met with similar success. Gradually, efforts to expand
the programme extended to places where there were only a few Bahá’ís, none
of whom had advanced through the sequence of institute courses or had been
trained as animators of junior youth groups. As groups were established in
these areas, a number of challenges arose: animators who had to travel from
their own villages were not able to sustain the effort; with widespread interest
in having the course material delivered in English, many animators felt their
language skills were inadequate; and the size of the groups became difficult to
manage, with as many as 40 junior youth turning up for some sessions.
While the first efforts in the villages were being made, three other groups
were formed in junior secondary schools, which meet during periods allocated for religious instruction. Not long after, the Bahá’í community received
a request from government officials to address growing concerns about the
conduct of junior youth, and these groups were re-envisioned as a project of
Glimpses from five continents — 51

social and economic development, falling under the aegis of the otan Marawa
educational Institute (oMeI), a Bahá’í-inspired development organization .
As with the efforts in the villages, initial expansion of the number of groups
in academic schools proved difficult to sustain . In response, oMeI decided to
concentrate on one group in order to learn from experience . The following
year, three groups were established and sustained at two schools .

The Junior Youth Group in the Betio Junior Secondary School in 2006, a
small junior youth group was formed under the sponsorship of omei to study the materials of the
spiritual empowerment programme in an academic school in South tarawa. the programme was
offered as a supplement to language studies that would address two pressing needs: to improve
students’ english language skills and to assist in their moral and spiritual development. With the
principal’s agreement, seven participants from the class with the lowest level of english literacy
began meeting at the school on the weekends. By June, the students’ reading skills had improved
so dramatically that some were moved to a higher grade class—though they loved their junior youth
group so much that they did not want to leave it. the programme also had a positive effect on the
participants’ behaviour; one young boy even commented that when he grows up he wants to be
just like his animator.
The aid of a resource person from Australia proved vital in helping the
friends respond to the many opportunities and challenges that were unfolding with junior youth in both the villages and schools . Through a combination of visits and email contact, she trained animators, helped to expand the
number of junior youth groups, and assisted those working with the schools
to gain a deeper understanding of both the principles of social and economic
development and the conceptual basis of the junior youth programme . She
also systematically developed the capacity of those serving at oMeI, so that
within a year the organization was run entirely by local believers . She worked
with the cluster agencies to address challenges in the context of coordination,
with an emphasis on providing sustained support for animators in order to
ensure continuity . They examined topics such as the preparation of animators
using Book 5, the importance of holding regular “encounters” with animators and conducting refresher courses for them, and the need to visit junior
youth groups periodically . The agencies learned what it means to accompany
newly trained animators in their efforts to form and maintain junior youth
groups, what kind of service projects the young people can undertake, and
how to enhance the artistic component of the programme . Because the work

Marebo Teem, a youth who was born into a Bahá’í family, attended children’s classes and as
an older child enjoyed helping with the lessons for the younger ones. encouraged by her parents,
she participated in the institute campaigns organized for the youth and quickly progressed through
the sequence of courses. marebo was trained as an animator for junior youth groups in 2006 and,
at the age of 16, was invited to assist the coordinator for this activity in South tarawa in the villages
of Bikenibeu and Causeway, visiting groups every two weeks, conducting animator encounters
every two months, providing refresher courses as needed, and consulting with the other assistant
coordinators.

52 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

with this age group was clearly beyond the capacity of the one coordinator
appointed, a number of capable assistants were recruited, one of whom was
Marebo Teem.
The efforts of the believers in Kiribati, with the support of the resource
person, have borne fruit. The number of groups in the villages has consistently been 20 or more since the beginning of 2007, and although participation has fluctuated through the cycles of the intensive programme for
growth, it has generally been greater than 250, drawn largely from the wider
community. Further, by October 2007, there were 11 junior youth groups
in local schools.

Children’s Classes

South Tarawa
Kiribati

While the Rid.ván 2000 message provided a strong stimulus for the education
of Bahá’í children, regular children’s classes were only established after a more
systematic approach to child education was adopted following the translation of Book 3 in the I-Kiribati language. Neighbourhood children’s classes
began when the intensive programme of growth was launched, and by the
end of the first cycle, the number of children’s classes had grown from 12 to
19, with 285 participants. Collaboration between the cluster coordinators for
children’s classes and junior youth groups has greatly facilitated the multiplication of these activities, as the coordinators visit the homes of seekers together
to explain the material available for both age groups. Parents are invited to
enrol their children in the programmes, and trained animators and children’s
class teachers are assigned to work with the young people. The potential for
the expansion of children’s classes is immense. In October 2007, the number
had grown to 27, with 330 children participating, and in January 2008, the
people of Buota village approached the Bahá’ís asking for someone to come
and teach classes to their children.

Glimpses from five continents — 53

The Way Forward
Bahá’u’lláh wrote: “Should they attempt to conceal His light on the continent,
He will assuredly rear His head in the midmost heart of the ocean and, raising His voice, proclaim: ‘I am the lifegiver of the world!’”1 The vision of the
growth of the Bahá’í community of Kiribati, the first nation to see the sunrise
at the dawn of the new millennium, has been greatly inspired by these words.
In the South Tarawa cluster, some 30 souls are now entering into the embrace
of their Beloved with each cycle, 40 per cent of whom generally go on to study
the institute courses. Further challenges and opportunities surely lie ahead.
And yet with every step that the friends in South Tarawa take along the path
of growth, with every opportunity they seize and every challenge they meet,
they move closer to the realization of Bahá’u’lláh’s prophetic statement.

1

54 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh: Selected Letters (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust,
1991, 2004 printing), p. 108.

Acceleration of Learning

The case studies presented in this volume describe the journey that has taken
the friends in five clusters along a path of learning and progress until, in each,
an intensive programme of growth has been well established . In all five, the
elements of the framework for action resulted in a vigorous pattern of growth
only after years of effort . Yet, a most promising feature of the second year
of the current Five Year Plan has been the way in which the transfer of lessons and insights from such clusters has accelerated the movement of others
through successive stages of development . When these lessons pertained to
the spiritually charged act of presenting Bahá’u’lláh’s Message “in a manner
both forthcoming and inviting”1, the rise in the rate of expansion has often
been dramatic .
Much of the acceleration witnessed can be traced back to the creative
impulse which the Rid .ván 2007 message of the Universal House of Justice
imparted to the Bahá’í world . The message reminded the believers that with
so firm a foundation in place after 12 years of consecrated exertion, teaching
was to be the foremost thought in all our minds . The expression of longing
by the House of Justice to see teaching become “the dominating passion in
the life of every believer”2, a state of enkindlement expressed in “unremitting
action”3, evoked from the believers a spirited response that has proven to be
as dynamic as it has been systematic .
In the Rid .ván message, the House of Justice makes reference to the operation of clusters “in a robust state of growth”4, indicating that in such areas
the means had been found for carrying forward the work of expansion and
consolidation hand in hand . In the months that followed, a number of simple
strategies were adopted to accelerate the propagation of learning from these
stronger clusters to as many others as possible . And as these strategies were
implemented in diverse places, it became increasingly clear that the process of
entry by troops was advancing at a new pace .

. . . a number of
simple strategies
were adopted to
accelerate the
propagation of
learning from these
stronger clusters to
as many others as
possible.

Individuals as Channels for the Propagation of Learning
Following the release of the Rid .ván message, the surge in the believers’ desire
to enter the teaching field was readily apparent . equally evident, however, was
the need in many instances for the friends to be accompanied in their efforts
by individuals who could share the experience of their clusters in effective
teaching campaigns, inspire confidence, generate enthusiasm, and demonstrate
how to implement the methods and approaches examined in institute courses .
In the early summer of 2007, the International Teaching Centre identified,
with the help of the Counsellors, a few individuals with proven experience in
their own clusters in applying the elements of the framework of the Five Year
Glimpses from five continents — 55

Although the
exchange of practical
aspects of learning
and the concomitant
rise in capacity
among the local
believers have been
vital . . . their
travels have exerted
a deep spiritual
inﬂuence . . .

Plan, particularly in the context of expansion . These friends were then asked
to travel to certain clusters, in all of which conditions were propitious for an
intensive programme of growth but, despite the efforts exerted, the level of
enrolments remained low .
The Bangui cluster in the Central African Republic provides one of the
earliest examples of what movement of this kind can achieve . A believer from
the Lubumbashi cluster in the Democratic Republic of the Congo travelled
to Bangui, where the rate of expansion did not match the clear potential for
growth . The visitor collaborated closely with the Auxiliary Board members and
cluster agencies, who had taken steps to prepare the ground for his arrival .
Together they planned a teaching project for the outlying areas of the cluster, selecting populations on which to focus their efforts, consulting on the
number of teams to be formed, and discussing teaching materials and setting
goals . Because raising capacity among the local friends is integral to the work
of individuals serving as such resource persons, the visitor accompanied the
teaching teams in the field each day, paying particular attention to the functions of the team coordinators .
A total of 72 new souls embraced the Cause during the ninth cycle—12 times
the average number of enrolments of the previous four cycles . Yet, perhaps
more impressive still was the transfer of learning from Lubumbashi to Bangui
about effective practical approaches to organizing the consolidation efforts,
leading to the creation of a detailed schedule for how each believer newly
enrolled was to be nurtured, especially through core activities . A remarkable
58 per cent of the new believers entered the institute process . In a subsequent
visit by this same person to the cluster, there was a further climb in the number
of enrolments, and the capacity and enthusiasm among the friends and agencies in Bangui rose higher still .
By the autumn of 2007, a number of similar initiatives on all continents
had been undertaken with comparable results . Although the exchange of practical aspects of learning and the concomitant rise in capacity among the local
believers have been vital, it is clear from the sense of enthusiasm generated and
the reception given to the visiting teachers that their travels have exerted a deep
spiritual influence, reminiscent of the words of Bahá’u’lláh: “The movement
itself from place to place, when undertaken for the sake of God, hath always
exerted, and can now exert, its influence in the world .”5

Sites for the Dissemination of Learning
Another strategy that emerged over the past year, closely related to the deployment of resource persons, involved the selection of strong clusters as sites for
the dissemination of learning . The agencies working in such clusters, all in
a robust state of growth, were assisted by the Counsellors in developing the
capacity to receive a group of friends from other countries and expose them
to the methods and approaches being successfully employed to sustain the
accelerated expansion and consolidation of the Faith . A group of this kind
may well include those who will draw on the experience to help further the
development of their home clusters, as well as those who will be deployed as
resource persons to assist other areas .
Recognizing the need for individuals who could act as resource persons,
the Counsellors in the Americas identified 17 friends from seven countries in
Central and South America with the potential to serve in this way . Given the
56 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

strength of the process of growth in the Norte del Cauca cluster, Colombia,
these friends were invited there for a workshop which involved them in a
combined process of study and action for one month . The workshop included
study of guidance from the Universal House of Justice and certain concepts
elaborated in the institute courses, practice in analysing available information
to assess the state of a cluster’s progress, and the formulation of plans on that
basis, both for expansion and consolidation . Instruction and practice in direct
teaching approaches and the organization of a teaching project drew on the
content of Ruhi Institute Book 6 . Participants also had an opportunity to
visit study circles in action, participate in meetings of cluster agencies and
the reflection gathering, and take part in the expansion phase of the cycle of
activity and several days of the consolidation phase .
These friends then went as resource persons to some of the stronger clusters in different parts of Latin America . Results were immediate . The teaching
work received impetus, and the capacity of the local friends to promote systematic expansion and consolidation was enhanced considerably . From August
to october 2007, as some 30 clusters benefited from this transfer of learning,
almost 1,700 new believers embraced the Cause, of whom 42 per cent were
brought into the training institute process .
So effective was the approach that the International Teaching Centre
encouraged the Counsellors in every continent to take steps to replicate
the experience, and the development of learning sites in other parts of the
globe is proving to be equally successful in lending impetus to the process of
growth worldwide . In November 2007, for example, the cluster of Almaty
in Kazakhstan was chosen as such a site for Asiatic Russia and several neighbouring countries; 25 friends participated in a specially designed programme
of preparation, following which they were sent to selected clusters across the
region . Working with an outline of how to establish an effective direct teaching campaign, they collaborated with cluster agencies, assisted in formulating
systematic plans of action, and participated in their implementation shoulder
to shoulder with the local believers . After only one month, nearly 420 souls
had entered the Cause, an estimated 65 per cent of whom were immediately
enrolled in the institute programme, many beginning their study of Book 1
while the expansion phase was still in progress . The approach had produced
in that vast landmass of far-flung clusters with sparse Bahá’í populations a
result that otherwise would have taken years to obtain .
experience has demonstrated that sites for the dissemination of learning
can be used effectively not only to transfer knowledge related to the movement
of clusters in all its dimensions, but to further understanding of some specific
aspect of the process . Work with junior youth is a case in point .
In the Portal da Glória cluster in Brazil, for example, the friends have managed to significantly multiply the number of junior youth groups over the past
year, which currently boasts some 800 participants . The first 21 young people
to complete the three-year programme for their moral and spiritual empowerment have all gone on to study the sequence of institute courses, and already
five teach children’s classes . Many of the current junior youth participants
aspire to be animators of groups themselves . The insights gained by the friends
in sustaining such large numbers in groups place the Portal da Glória cluster
in the vanguard of the learning process, making it an ideal site for developing the capacities of individuals coordinating the work with junior youth
from across the region . In February 2008, at the request of the Counsellors,

. . . sites for the
dissemination of
learning can be
used eﬀectively not
only to transfer
knowledge related
to the movement
of clusters in all its
dimensions, but to
further understanding
of some speciﬁc aspect
of the process.

Glimpses from five continents — 57

. . . pioneers who
operate eﬀectively in
the Plan’s framework
for action can lend
focus, speed, and
direction to the
development of a
cluster . . . becoming
in this way agents for
the acceleration of
learning.

in collaboration with the office of Social and economic Development at the
Bahá’í World Centre, a seminar was held in Portal da Glória for those working
with junior youth in Brazil, mostly cluster coordinators, during which they
reviewed materials, reflected on their own experiences in assisting animators,
and observed an “encounter” for a large number of animators . Visiting several junior youth groups in the company of the coordinator for this activity
in Portal da Glória, they were able to see how animators are accompanied in
practice in this cluster .
Today, well over 50 clusters have been identified that can function as sites
for the dissemination of learning . About half of these will have a special focus
on supporting efforts to expand the junior youth programme in the regions
they serve . What will be essential is for the overall process of learning in all of
these sites to be rigorously pursued and the capacity to host groups of visitors
consistently built .

Homefront Pioneers as Agents of Learning
The settlement of pioneers as a means for spreading the Cause is, of course, a
feature of Bahá’í life that is well understood . What recent experience shows is
that pioneers who operate effectively in the Plan’s framework for action can
lend focus, speed, and direction to the development of a cluster, particularly
one in the early stages of growth, becoming in this way agents for the acceleration of learning .
Cambodia offers a notable example of what can be achieved . experience
in applying the framework for action is rich in that country, and its pool of
human resources continues to swell as the number of those engaged in the
study of institute courses grows . This has made it possible for several strong
clusters to act as seedbeds from which homefront pioneers can be dispatched
and receive ongoing systematic support .
Invariably such pioneers have acquired a heightened sense of service
through participation in the institute process and have proven experience both
in carrying out core activities and working in teaching teams . Most crucial,
however, is their ability to strengthen capacity in others . After settling in an
unopened cluster, they gather together a group of young individuals receptive
to the Message and establish at least one core activity, commonly a study circle .
As these young people deepen their understanding of the Faith in this way, they
become increasingly active protagonists in the process of growth—protagonists
who see the core activities as necessary components for building a community
rich in its spiritual life and socially active in its orientation .
once this initial cohort of new believers has studied the early books of
the sequence—usually defined as Books 1 and 2—those who show the greatest interest are invited to attend centralized courses in a strong cluster nearby .
There, they complete the study of Books 3 to 5 with believers of recognized
experience, such as coordinators, and gain practice in teaching children’s classes
and conducting junior youth activities in the context of that cluster’s dynamic
teaching work .
Upon their return home, these relatively new believers can initiate and
multiply children’s classes and junior youth groups, fortifying the pattern of
activity of their emerging community . only weeks later, some again return
to the established cluster, this time to study Books 6 and 7 . Now they are
equipped to significantly augment the strength of the training institute

58 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

process in their cluster, which can quickly reach the stage of self-sufficiency .
Throughout the early stages, teams of travelling teachers sent from stronger
clusters provide assistance to the pioneer in various aspects of the process of
growth and reinforce local efforts .
Through this systematic and now well-proven approach, clusters in
Cambodia not only can generate sufficient human resources for their own
development but also have the capacity to establish a pattern of dynamic
growth in neighbouring clusters within months . For example, in February
2006, a homefront pioneer family moved into the Pursat cluster where there
were few believers at the time . By December 2007, the number of believers had
grown to 610, many of whom were being nurtured in an impressive number
of core activities: 31 study circles, 19 devotional meetings, 14 children’s classes,
and 12 junior youth groups . on the basis of this experience, the institutions in
Cambodia have made plans to ensure that all remaining clusters in that country
establish intensive programmes of growth by the end of the current Plan .

Learning about Reaching Receptive Populations
The strategies described above have now been employed with considerable success in clusters around the world . As already noted, much of the learning that
was propagated was about practical issues, for example, how to administer an
intensive programme of growth, how to organize teaching teams in campaigns,
and how to analyse data . But the most crucial lessons transferred were related
to direct teaching, perhaps the area in which the most significant advances in
learning were made worldwide this past year .
Reaching large numbers in regions where populations have traditionally shown a high degree of receptivity to the Faith has never been difficult .
However, teaching on a wide scale in these regions had steadily declined over
the years as it did not prove possible to meet the challenges associated with
consolidation . The last few months have seen a reawakening of the spirit of
direct teaching through collective campaigns in clusters with such receptive
populations, but now as one of several elements integrated into a coherent
programme of sustainable growth .
What was even more noteworthy, however, was that the same kind of
forthright presentation of the Faith proved to be equally effective in areas where
populations were thought to be less receptive, generally urban centres . The
spark of teaching had already been reignited in such clusters as the believers
learned to open core activities to family members, friends, co-workers, and
associates . In recent months these believers have taken a significant next step,
anticipated by the Universal House of Justice in its message of 27 December
2005 . emboldened by the receptivity they found in their immediate circles,
and drawing on their experience in individual direct teaching, they carried
out campaigns among receptive populations, typically those residing in a welldefined part of a city, such as a neighbourhood, a block of apartments, or a
collection of dwellings .
For several years the friends in Toronto, Canada, were striving to understand the dynamics of teaching the Faith to receptive populations . In 2007, an
effort was launched to build on the accumulated experience to date, especially
in presenting the Message in a more direct manner than in the past . eight
neighbourhoods—principally apartment blocks with large immigrant communities—were selected because of the likely receptivity of their inhabitants .

. . . the most crucial
lessons transferred
were related to direct
teaching, perhaps
the area in which
the most signiﬁcant
advances in learning
were made worldwide
this past year.

Glimpses from five continents — 59

That in a matter of
months the adoption
of a few simple
strategies has given
rise to so remarkable
an acceleration
of learning is a
testament to the
heightened capacity
of the community.

And at last the long-cherished goal of the friends in Toronto was realized .
While there were several declarations as a result of this effort, the most striking
outcome was that more than 500 new people started to attend core activities .
Parents were particularly attracted to activities for the spiritual and moral education of their children and junior youth—a pressing concern resulting from
cultural and social dislocation . Stirred by the passion for teaching among the
populations they have begun to know, 15 believers, mostly youth and young
adults, have moved into these neighbourhoods to nourish the capacities of
seekers and new believers and to foster the growth of nascent communities,
where already core activities are seen as a natural part of the collective life .
This approach to finding receptive souls is now being employed with
significant results in settings as diverse as the teeming cities of India and the
sprawling urban centres of the United States . Consider the state of Arizona .
For a year the multiplication of classes in neighbourhoods in the Phoenix
cluster had provided a sound spiritual education to a growing number of
children whose parents were not Bahá’ís, especially among the Hispanic population . As a natural consequence, when an intensive programme of growth
was launched in December 2007, the parents of such children were found
to be especially receptive to the Message . The outreach to these parents and
others incorporated learning about teaching in urban settings that had taken
friends in other clusters months, even years, to acquire . The expansion phase
employed direct teaching methods in collective action marked by intensity and
high spirits . With the enrolment and registration of 70 individuals in 15 days,
the expansion phase in Phoenix became the most effective one of its kind
in North America, and the friends newly enrolled were integrated with ease
into the pattern of community life that had been emerging gradually over the
years as core activities were established . only three weeks later, friends in the
neighbouring cluster of Tucson launched their own teaching campaign, which
incorporated lessons learned in Phoenix and took their existing programme of
growth to a new level . But that is not all . Three weeks later still, the believers
in the east Valley cluster launched their programme of growth, now with the
advantage of the learning acquired by the other two . Selected friends from
various regions of the United States came to participate and learn, and again
the results were unprecedented . More than 100 souls embraced the Cause of
God within nine days—and many more expressed interest in continuing to
learn about the Faith . In fact, such was the receptivity and response that the
cluster agencies had to end the expansion phase three days early to ensure
that the consolidation efforts could keep pace with the expansion . The echoes
from these three sister clusters in Arizona are already resounding throughout
the United States .



The foregoing analysis demonstrates, yet again, the value of the learning mode
in which the Bahá’í community increasingly operates . That in a matter of
months the adoption of a few simple strategies has given rise to so remarkable
an acceleration of learning is a testament to the heightened capacity of the
community . The body of knowledge on which the friends can draw in promoting the growth of a cluster has expanded greatly with the insights gained
into the dynamics of direct teaching during the second year of the Plan . In
every cluster, irrespective of its current stage of development, the believers
60 — Attaining the dynamics of growth

can now think in terms of cycles of activity and establish a rhythm of growth
that is distinguished by a recurring surge of expansion followed by a period
of consolidation—a period during which the attention given to the institute
process rapidly increases the human resources needed to raise the level of
intensity. There can be little doubt, then, that the goal of establishing at least
1,500 intensive programmes of growth by the end of the Five Year Plan is well
within reach.

1

Message dated 27 December 2005 written by the Universal House of Justice to the
Conference of the Continental Boards of Counsellors.

2

Rid.ván 2007 message written by the Universal House of Justice to the Bahá’ís of the
world.

3

Ibid.

4

Ibid.

5

The Advent of Divine Justice (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1990, 2006 printing),
pp. 126–127.

Glimpses from five continents — 61

