Training Institutes:
Attaining a Higher Level
of Functioning

A document prepared by
The International Teaching Centre
BAHÁ’Í WORLD CENTRE
JANUARY 2017

TRAINING INSTITUTES:
ATTAINING A HIGHER LEVEL OF FUNCTIONING

INTRODUCTION
1.

THE MAIN SEQUENCE OF COURSES
1.1
1.2
1.3

2.

THE JUNIOR YOUTH SPIRITUAL EMPOWERMENT PROGRAMME
2.1
2.2
2.3

3.

Clusters Where the Friends are Establishing an Intensive Programme of Growth
Clusters Where the Friends are Learning to Embrace Large Numbers
Coordination of Junior Youth Groups

THE PROGRAMME FOR THE SPIRITUAL EDUCATION OF CHILDREN
3.1
3.2
3.3

4.

Raising the Number and Enhancing the Capacity of Tutors
Ensuring a Steady Flow of Participants through the Sequence of Courses
Coordination of the Main Sequence of Courses

Clusters Where the Friends are Establishing an Intensive Programme of Growth
Clusters Where the Friends are Learning to Embrace Large Numbers
Coordination of Children’s Classes

INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7

Formulating a Vision
Learning and the Ability to Disseminate the Accruing Knowledge
The Evolution of Organizational Schemes
Enhancing the Capacity of the Institute Itself
Managing Effectively the Financial and Material Resources
Some Administrative Aspects
The Training Institute Board

TRAINING INSTITUTES:
ATTAINING A HIGHER LEVEL OF FUNCTIONING
In its message dated 29 December 2015 to the Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors, the Universal House of Justice stated that attaining a higher level of functioning is
a pressing concern of training institutes. This concern comes into sharp focus when viewed in
the context of the goals before the Bahá’í world during this Five Year Plan: to “seek to raise the
number of clusters where a programme of growth has become intensive to 5,000 by Riḍván 2021”1
and to add “several hundred more”2 to some two hundred clusters that have already advanced
beyond the third milestone. As stated by the House of Justice:
The community’s efforts to fortify programmes of growth in thousands of clusters
and sustain their intensification will place heavy demands on these agencies. Their
focus, of course, is the unfoldment of the three stages of the educational process
they oversee and the strengthening of the process of learning associated with each,
so that both the quality of the institute’s activities and the capacity to extend them
to ever-growing numbers are constantly rising.3
In the institutional meetings held across the world to prepare for the beginning of the
current Five Year Plan, the friends benefited from viewing what was happening in each cluster
from two perspectives. The first, engaging in three-monthly cycles of activity through which
the community grows, with attention to teaching the Faith and conversation with those from the
wider society, and, the second, the unfoldment of the three educational imperatives overseen by
the training institute. Regarding the latter, the House of Justice has stated the following:
In this context, one speaks of three educational imperatives, each distinguished by
its own methods and materials, each claiming a share of resources, and each served
by mechanisms to systematize experience and to generate knowledge based on
insights gained in the field. Quite naturally, then, three discussions take shape
around the implementation of the programme for the spiritual education of
children, the junior youth spiritual empowerment programme, and the main
sequence of courses.4
To help the friends managing the operations of training institutes to respond to current
exigencies, this document shares some insights from the body of experience that has accrued in
the Bahá’í world about implementing the main sequence of courses, the junior youth spiritual
empowerment programme, and the programme for the spiritual education of children. The
document also addresses matters related to the institutional capacity of training institutes. It is
hoped that in each region or country the friends responsible for the institute’s endeavours will,
taking their particular circumstances and experience into consideration, use these insights to
further systematize their efforts.
1. THE MAIN SEQUENCE OF COURSES
As is generally understood, the study of institute courses in a given cluster often starts
with only a small group of participants who then begin to offer one or another of the acts of
service the courses recommend. For the process of growth to advance meaningfully, the number

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 2

of people studying institute courses must continue to rise. The principal issues that lie at the heart
of this objective include raising the number and enhancing the capacity of those serving as tutors,
sustaining a steady flow of participants through the sequence of courses, and coordinating the
institute’s efforts through effective mechanisms.
Raising the Number and Enhancing the Capacity of Tutors
Fundamental to strengthening the educational programmes of the training institute is a
steadily increasing number of capable tutors who, over time, are assisted to grow in effectiveness.
1.1.1 The initial cadre of tutors
Institutes face a number of questions with regard to clusters where a programme of
growth is nascent, among them: how to meaningfully extend the reach of the study of institute
courses to each cluster, and how to ensure that “within a reasonable period, some among those
residing in a cluster are enabled to serve as tutors”.5
Local friends in clusters with new programmes of growth have initially relied on
participating in the study of the courses offered by experienced tutors in more advanced clusters
nearby or farther afield. They have also benefited from the services of one or two carefully
selected and prepared visiting tutors drawn from the strong clusters who in some instances also
serve as homefront pioneers for a short or long term. In either case, the tutors involved are most
effective when they appreciate that they are promoting a process with far-reaching implications
for the spiritual and material life of a population. Besides assisting the first batch of friends to
arise and serve, through the courses they offer the tutors help build a strong foundation of
understanding and experience on which the institute process is gradually erected.
Yet, it is not until some of the local friends begin serving as tutors that the institute truly
takes root in a cluster and the number of those studying institute courses increases significantly.
The first steps in this regard may be to encourage a few friends from among those who have
studied the early courses and gained some experience with the related activities to begin helping
others study the courses. Visiting tutors may begin by calling on these friends to help in leading
discussions of sections of the materials and organizing the related practices. They might also
delve with them deeper into challenging aspects of the study and practice under way. In this
manner, some local friends are carefully enabled to start offering others at least the first two
courses of the sequence. An in-depth review of these courses, carried out together with a study
of portions of Ruhi Institute Book 7 and the continued aid of an experienced tutor, may further
prepare the local friends for this task. As they serve in this manner and progress in their own
study of the courses, their capacity to help others who desire to serve grows.
Where this approach is wisely applied, it sets a number of people on the path of learning
how to facilitate a process through which the capacity of individuals eager to contribute to
intensifying the community-building process is built. Further, by helping larger numbers of
people to study institute courses, it provides as early as possible a growing base of participation
by the local friends in the related activities. But a word of caution is in order. The desired
outcomes are less likely to occur if the process of raising tutors becomes one in which everyone
is asked to form a study group the moment he or she finishes one or two courses. In such
instances, great effort may be expended and large numbers briefly obtained, but the results
sought of enabling ever more people to promote the community-building process remain elusive.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 3

1.1.2 An expanding body of tutors
When the services of one or two visiting tutors are reinforced by a few local friends who
are learning to offer institute courses, this team of five or so individuals makes it possible to
expand the number of people studying the courses and initiating activities, thus intensifying the
work under way and propelling the cluster on its path of progress to move beyond the second
milestone.
Yet, the cluster requires an expanding body of tutors if it is to continue to advance. If in
each cluster the number of those capable of serving as tutors is to rise, more people from among
those promoting teaching and community-building activities have to keep advancing along the
sequence of courses. For it is only when ever-growing contingents are immersed in concurrent
and sustained study and service that the body of effective tutors meaningfully expands. This
underscores the cumulative character of the capacity-building process engendered by the
sequence of courses. With each course studied, knowledge of the Faith increases, insights into
spiritual matters deepen, spiritual susceptibilities expand, requisite qualities and attitudes
develop, and skills and abilities sharpen. Individuals grow in the ability to investigate the
Sacred Writings, to understand the reality of their community, and to engage in conversations of
significance. They become better able to consult on their needs, to collaborate with others, and
to reflect on and improve their efforts. As they become ever more conscious of the divine
assistance surrounding them, they grow in confidence. When such an experience embraces
more and more people, and many of them after studying Book 7 are assisted to form a study
circle and serve as tutors, they apply all these abilities in efforts to accompany others on the path
of service. In this manner, a cluster eventually comes to be served by a score or more local
friends capable of acting as tutors. Through their efforts the number of individuals who are
enabled to start and sustain core activities and other acts of service in the cluster steadily grows.
1.1.3 Raising the effectiveness of those serving as tutors
In its Riḍván 2010 message, the Universal House of Justice observed that the worldwide
Bahá’í community has “succeeded in developing a culture which promotes a way of thinking,
studying, and acting, in which all consider themselves as treading a common path of service”,
and has “acquired the capacity to enable thousands, nay millions, to study the writings in small
groups with the explicit purpose of translating the Bahá’í teachings into reality”.6 Within this
lie the dynamics of an irrepressible movement that can be fostered in local populations, and “much
will fall on those who serve as tutors in this respect”.7 The House of Justice further explained:
Theirs will be the challenge to provide the environment that is envisioned in the
institute courses, an environment conducive to the spiritual empowerment of
individuals, who will come to see themselves as active agents of their own learning,
as protagonists of a constant effort to apply knowledge to effect individual and
collective transformation. Failing this, no matter how many study circles are
formed in a cluster, the force necessary to propel change will not be generated.8
Those responsible for overseeing the work of each institute are charged with learning
how tutors can become increasingly effective in helping individuals release their potential to
contribute to progress within the clusters they serve. In this regard, there are some specific
concerns for each institute to address.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 4

Friends who serve as tutors are most effective when they understand well the institute’s
purpose to raise human resources that are capable of fostering the process of community
building through the application of Bahá’í teachings. These friends need to appreciate the
nature of the institute process and “the dynamics that underlie it—the spirit of fellowship it
creates, the participatory approach it adopts, the depth of understanding it fosters, the acts of
service it recommends, and, above all, its reliance on the Word of God”.9 They must become
increasingly familiar with how the process enhances capabilities for serving the Cause by
integrating study, practice, and service. As the tutors gain experience, they acquire deeper
insights into how each institute book builds on the previous ones to empower individuals.
They grasp the spiritual qualities each course elicits, the attitudes it promotes, the knowledge
it imparts, the skills it endows, the act of service it introduces, and the interactions it fosters.
Ultimately, tutors grow to be capable of facilitating the study of the books in a way that
enhances understanding and shapes attitudes, and of organizing the practical components in a
manner that builds confidence. When tutors help participants to begin applying, first in the
context of the study circle and then in the community, what they are learning, everyone—the
tutors included—appreciates better the nature of the unfolding community-building process.
Further, tutors promote a spiritually empowering environment and profound friendship among
those studying together. They link budding efforts of these friends to the process of community
building under way and to the institutions and agencies of the Faith that stand ready to support
all those studying institute courses.
Of course, “the capabilities of a tutor develop progressively as an individual enters
the field of action and assists others in contributing to the aim of the present series of global
Plans”.10 The coordinators of the training institute ensure that those acting as tutors are properly
supported by, among other means, promoting mutual support and assistance among the tutors,
working alongside them in the field, and gathering them in meetings for reflection.
Mutual support and assistance
Coordinators strive to create in a cluster an atmosphere in which those serving as tutors—
new and veteran alike—assist one another in their service. Experienced tutors make themselves
available to those taking their initial steps by either offering together with them some of the
courses or sharing with them their insights. However, irrespective of the experience of the
individuals involved, carrying out activities together in the field and drawing on one another’s
knowledge serves not only to strengthen abilities but also to deepen commitment.
Working alongside tutors and organizing gatherings for reflection
Coordinators “bring both practical experience and dynamism”11 to their efforts to work
in the field with those serving as tutors. The concrete questions that confront the tutors are many.
For instance, they seek to learn about the nature and content of a conversation effective at
inviting someone to study Book 1, how to organize the first meeting of a study circle, how to
articulate well the aim of the sequence of courses and purpose of each book, and how to keep
the discussion of the themes in the course focused and advancing. Many of these questions
are answered in the field as the tutors labour together with others and are accompanied by a
coordinator or a more experienced colleague.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 5

Such interactions are complemented by regular gatherings of tutors for reflection and for
further study of the courses. In these occasions, tutors review relevant materials to deepen their
understanding of concepts underlying the institute process and the Plans of the Faith, reflect on
the efforts under way, articulate their evolving experience, and examine further the books they
are offering. Depending on the number of tutors, these meetings happen at different levels of the
community—a village or neighbourhood, a cluster or a number of adjoining clusters, and even
a region or a country. Some gatherings involve all the tutors and address matters of general
interest; others focus on specific groups, for instance, new tutors, those facilitating a specific
course, or those working with a segment of a population, such as youth or women. These
occasions are most effective when the consultations of the friends are organized around a set
of questions about which they are learning.
Ensuring a Steady Flow of Participants through the Sequence of Courses
Capacity to sustain a steady flow of people through the institute courses expands as
the friends in a cluster learn to engage increasing numbers in conversations on the teachings
of the Faith, nurture the participation of youth, manage a growing stream of young people from
junior youth groups into the main sequence, and use in a complementary manner study circles
and institute campaigns as modes of course delivery.
1.2.1 Fostering conversations on the teachings of the Faith
The capacity to involve growing numbers in the study of institute courses advances along
with the ability to foster increasingly rich conversations about the Bahá’í teachings within a
population. The sequence of courses itself lends some structure to how these conversations
unfold. In its message dated 29 December 2015, the Universal House of Justice stated:
From the beginning of the sequence of courses, a participant encounters Bahá’u’lláh’s
Revelation in considering such weighty themes as worship, service to humanity,
the life of the soul, and the education of children and youth. As a person cultivates
the habit of study and deep reflection upon the Creative Word, this process of
transformation reveals itself in an ability to express one’s understanding of
profound concepts and to explore spiritual reality in conversations of significance.
These capacities are visible not only in the elevated discussions that increasingly
characterize interactions within the community, but in the ongoing conversations
that reach well beyond—not least between the Bahá’í youth and their peers—
extending to include parents whose daughters and sons are benefiting from
the community’s programmes of education. Through exchanges of this kind,
consciousness of spiritual forces is raised, apparent dichotomies yield to unexpected
insights, a sense of unity and common calling is fortified, confidence that a better
world can be created is strengthened, and a commitment to action becomes manifest.
Such distinctive conversations gradually attract ever-larger numbers to take part in
a range of community activities.12
The pattern and quality of the movement of people through the sequence of courses
greatly impacts how conversations on the teachings advance in a population. The description
that follows, although generalized, will help to illustrate this point.
In a village or neighbourhood where a small group begins to study Book 1, the participants
naturally converse on such spiritual matters as the Word of God, prayer, and the life of the soul.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 6

Praying, reading the writings, and taking oneself into account begin to take root among them as
a daily discipline. Possibility for exploring together other themes from the writings of the Faith
grows when these friends are offered and begin reading the Hidden Words, as recommended in
the first unit of Book 1. The reach of this conversation expands when they initiate visits to the
homes of their friends and neighbours to share prayers. The introduction of a few devotional
meetings provides a space where more people, Bahá’í or not, gather to pray and reflect on
the implications of the Writings for their individual and collective life. This seemingly simple
advance becomes a means for inviting to the study of institute courses those who show
receptivity, leading to an increase in people entering the path of service.
When some among those who have completed Book 1 come to study Book 2, the themes
and concepts on which they deliberate with others broaden to include, for example, the eternal
Covenant, unity in the community, Bahá’í principles relating to various social teachings, and
others that arise as the friends learn to respond to the needs of the hearer. The homes they visit
in this connection become additional venues for profound conversations. Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings
on the spiritual instruction of children—and on the part individuals, families, and the community
play in this regard—begin to be considered as some study Book 3 and a few children’s classes
are formed. Even a simple event convened with some regularity for families and neighbours to
find out what the children are learning elevates discussion on the meaning and implication of a
community nurturing its children spiritually.
When some people study Book 4, the conversations begin to touch more deeply on the
Persons of Bahá’u’lláh and the Báb and on the interplay between crisis and victory that Their
noble lives illustrate. The study of Book 5 fuels exchanges on Bahá’í teachings relating to
spiritually empowering the junior youth, which, given the societal forces assailing this age
group, resonate with youth, parents, and community leaders. The study of Book 6 fosters the
capacity to engage in “a conversation between two souls”13—a direct teaching effort that “can
become a catalyst for an enduring process of spiritual transformation”.14
Thus, each course studied assists in enabling an expanding number of friends to express
their “understanding of profound concepts and to explore spiritual reality in conversations of
significance”.15 In this way, a village or a neighbourhood is gradually suffused with discussions
founded on the teachings of the Faith and on the emerging experience in applying them to
creating a new pattern of collective life. With the range of possible conversations, and “as
experience grows, the friends become more adept at discerning when they have found a hearing
ear, at deciding when to be more direct in sharing the message, at removing obstacles to
understanding, and at helping seekers to embrace the Cause”.16
The manner in which this capacity to engage a population in conversations on the teachings
is further systematized is described in the following statement of the Universal House of Justice:
As progress continues, the rising capacity for meaningful conversation is harnessed
in the plans of the institutions. By the time cycles of activity have formally
emerged, this capacity is being further stimulated through the expansion phase that
does so much to determine the outcome of each cycle. The precise objectives of
each expansion phase vary, of course, depending on conditions in the cluster and
the circumstances of the Bahá’í community. In some instances, its main aim is to
increase participation in the core activities; in others, readiness to enrol in the Faith
is discovered. Conversations about the Person of Bahá’u’lláh and the purpose of
His mission occur in a variety of settings, including firesides and visits to homes.17

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 7

Besides portraying how the sequence of courses gives shape to the unfolding of meaningful
conversations on the teachings of the Faith in a population, what the description above seeks to
show is how the reach, depth, and coherence of these conversations, on the one hand, and the
increase in the number of people studying institute courses, on the other, fuel each other.
1.2.2 Learning to nurture the participation of youth in institute courses
It is clear from the foregoing that much of the progress of a cluster depends on the ability
of the friends to engage a population in diverse and weighty conversations on the Bahá’í teachings
and then to draw its members into an educational process that multiplies their powers to
contribute to the building of a new society. It is natural, then, that at any point in this process
the friends would encounter certain particularly receptive segments of that population. As the
House of Justice has stated, the youth represent “a most responsive element of every receptive
population to which the friends have sought to reach out”.18 Initial endeavours to open a
particular channel for the entry of youth into the sequence of courses in a cluster are necessarily
modest. Effort is made—sometimes through specially organized gatherings—to reach out to a
group of youth, engage them in discussions that open before their eyes “a compelling vision of
how they can contribute to building a new world”,19 invite them to study the institute courses,
and then assist them to move swiftly into the arena of service. Often this involves the intensive
study of a set of courses such as Book 1, 3, and 5, since the acts of service to which they are
first introduced are usually teaching children’s classes and helping groups of junior youth. As
the process of growth advances, the manner in which the young people study institute courses
gradually comes to conform for the most part to the sequence in which the courses are arranged.
The institute might, however, from time to time offer some youth a selected number of courses
in order to accelerate the multiplication of activities.
1.2.3 A flow from junior youth groups into the main sequence
Another channel opens up as more and more of those in the junior youth groups turn
15 years old and are assisted to begin studying institute courses. Early in the process of growth
a cluster may experience entry into the main sequence by a few such young people. The first
noticeable flow from the groups might, however, occur only after the first three or so years of
offering the programme. Even then it might be quite modest. Only when capacity to sustain
large numbers of junior youth in stable groups is present in a cluster does an appreciable flow
happen.
To embrace the young people from the groups into institute courses, the agencies gradually
learn to track the progression of cohorts of junior youth through the texts; to help them see, as
they near the completion of the programme or the age of 15, the prospects for further study and
service that await them; to organize formal events to welcome them as individuals or as groups
into the main sequence; and to prepare the tutors, who, in some cases, may be the same friends
who accompanied them as animators, to work well with them. While the young people
“represent a vast reservoir of energy and talent that can be devoted to the advancement of
spiritual and material civilization”20 and they can do much to boost the efforts in a cluster,
expectations of how fast they can advance need to remain reasonable. Rushing them through
the sequence for the sole purpose of increasing one activity or another might in the long term
prove counterproductive. It would be best for them to advance along the sequence of courses at
a natural pace.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 8

1.2.4 Progression along the sequence of courses
In its message dated 12 December 2011 to all National Spiritual Assemblies, the
Universal House of Justice stated the following:
The main sequence of courses is organized so as to set the individual, whether
Bahá’í or not, on a path being defined by the accumulating experience of the
community in its endeavour to open before humanity the vision of Bahá’u’lláh’s
World Order. The very notion of a path is, itself, indicative of the nature and
purpose of the courses, for a path invites participation, it beckons to new horizons,
it demands effort and movement, it accommodates different paces and strides, it is
structured and defined. A path can be experienced and known, not only by one or
two but by scores upon scores; it belongs to the community.21
In this light, to raise more and more human resources in each cluster, “an increasing
number of friends are recruited to enter the first basic course, and relatively significant
percentages are then helped to reach higher and higher courses, acquiring thereby the needed
capabilities of service”.22 If only a small fraction of those who have studied the first course
advance to the second one, and another small fraction of these friends advance to the third
course, and so on, the work of the institute and ultimately the process of growth itself are
robbed of the required dynamism.
Progress of many people through the sequence of courses is more likely to occur when
the friends are able to associate their studies to specific action. They are eager to study the next
course in the sequence when they understand that moving together along a path of service
enables them to contribute to the advancement of their community. Such progress may be
impeded when the courses are inadvertently presented as an end in themselves or as a mere
deepening, when the pace of study is too slow or too fast, when deliberations on concepts are
not associated with experience, or when the practical components of the courses are neglected.
To ensure that the number of those proceeding along the sequence is substantial, institute
coordinators, often with other agencies in the cluster, meet periodically to review the flow of
participants from one book to the next. To determine when undue lag in the progression of
many friends has occurred and what its causes may be, they rely on accurate information about
participation in the courses. On the basis of a sound analysis, the institute may introduce
measures—such as discussions with the friends, well-timed institute campaigns, and the
assistance of visiting tutors—to remove obstacles standing in the way of the continued
participation of many people.
1.2.5 The delivery of institute courses
In most clusters worldwide, study circles remain the predominant mode of delivering
institute courses. In a cluster with a nascent programme of growth, the first study circles are
usually formed by visiting tutors or a homefront pioneer. As the number of local friends who
can act as tutors grows, the capacity to establish study circles necessarily increases. Apart from
helping growing numbers to arise and serve, well-functioning study circles foster among the
friends and between them and the institutions loving and mutually supportive interactions that
bind these protagonists of the Plan together in unified action.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 9

Study circles derive much of their effectiveness from the fact that they each constitute a
small group of friends who study the courses together in a local setting with the explicit purpose
of learning to apply Bahá’í teachings to their personal and collective life and to thus contribute
to a profound process of change. In an environment marked by sincere friendship and common
purpose, the members study the institute courses, engage in service and extracurricular
activities, and promote this mode of learning to others. As more and more friends serve as
tutors, various segments of a community’s inhabitants—youth, women, mothers, couples,
young professionals, and families—come to be accommodated in the study of the courses and
to play a part in efforts to promote spiritual and material well-being. The study circles become
distinct features of the life of the community when they operate with a measure of formality,
incorporating elements such as a formal beginning and ending, a certain membership, and a
defined schedule. Also, diverse and expanding numbers of the friends progress along the
sequence of courses when a degree of flexibility is allowed—the members, for instance, adjust
as needed the pace at which they perform the various activities, and while some of them may
leave when a particular course concludes, others might join as the study of a new one
commences. To ensure that the study of any particular course is not overly prolonged, the
friends might complement regular study with occasions for intensive study that might last a
weekend or a few days. When they have a healthy rhythm of progress, study circles do much to
invigorate programmes of growth.
In order to accelerate the flow of large numbers of friends along the sequence of courses,
study circles usually operate alongside institute campaigns. In clusters where there is great
receptivity, campaigns might for a while even be the main mode of course delivery. Involving
the intensive study of two or more institute courses over a relatively short time, institute
campaigns are held at all levels of the community—local, cluster or group of clusters, regional,
or national. The institutions and friends of the locality where the campaign is held are often
involved in planning and providing resources, and the campaigns are most effective when they
are scheduled during times of the year when many people can participate. A team of tutors—
some perhaps drawn from other communities or clusters—may be tasked with implementing
the campaign; these friends are required to give creative thought to carrying out the practical
components and accompanying the participants to initiate or extend their acts of service. When
offered in a locality, campaigns not only increase a community’s human resources within a
short period but also raise local capacity to support institute activities and invigorate the work
of teaching and consolidation through the practice and service activities of the participants.
For the agencies in a cluster, having a record of all study circles and institute campaigns
helps them to draw on the participants for the tasks of teaching, consolidation, and community
building. Occasionally, the agencies might gather all those studying institute courses to reflect
with them on their studies and services, to nurture their commitment, and to help them integrate
into the life of the community. As for the training institute, its responsibility is to design, based
on local circumstances, an approach to course delivery that coherently combines study circles
and institute campaigns so that capacity to enable ever-larger numbers of people to progress
along the sequence of courses can continue to grow and become manifest in an increasingly
vibrant process of community building.
Coordination of the Main Sequence of Courses
The efficacy of the training institute depends largely on there being at every point as a
cluster advances an effective arrangement for supporting the tutors, visiting or local. When a
programme of growth is still nascent, support might come from a homefront pioneer, a veteran

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 10

tutor or a coordinator from a nearby cluster, an Auxiliary Board member or an assistant, or a
regional or national coordinator. As more local friends begin serving as tutors, the most
experienced among them complement such external assistance by beginning to help others.
Often, after a cluster has passed the second milestone, the number of local tutors begins to
notably increase and a local coordinator is named from among the tutors most willing to assist
others in their services. In his or her efforts to accompany the tutors, such a coordinator might
continue to benefit, on the one hand, from the support of a more experienced colleague from an
advanced cluster or a regional or national coordinator, and, on the other hand, from the
assistance of capable local tutors with whom he or she collaborates. In a cluster that has passed
the third milestone, in which the number of tutors grows even larger, an additional coordinator
or two for the main sequence may be named from among the collaborators. It is, however,
unreasonable to expect that, as a cluster progresses further, “capacity would be built by simply
assigning more and more coordinators”23 to it. Strengthening mutual support and assistance
among the tutors guarantees that each of them is always adequately supported.
Irrespective of the scope of the community-building process in a cluster and the
arrangements in place to support the tutors, the concerns that shape the endeavours of the
coordinators are mostly the same. In general, they ensure that the number of those acting as
tutors rises and capacity among them to offer the full range of institute courses advances. They
pay special attention to promoting the study of Book 7, help tutors to form study circles, and aid
them to learn to facilitate effectively the study of the courses and the implementation of the
practical components. New tutors especially require help inviting people to study the institute
courses and enabling the participants to grasp the purpose and workings of a study circle. They
often also benefit from receiving assistance in facilitating the first few sections of whatever
course they are offering. Through such support, the tutors come to appreciate that individuals
persist in their studies when they see themselves growing in understanding, enhancing their
capabilities for service, and engaging in spiritually enriching interactions. To help the tutors
foster such conditions in their study circles, coordinators, as stated earlier, cultivate loving
collaboration among the tutors, labour alongside them in the field, and gather them in meetings
for reflection.
Depending on the circumstances on the ground, any one of the coordinators of the three
educational imperatives—the main sequence of courses, the junior youth programme, and the
programme for spiritual education of children—might be named first. Initially he or she might
also follow the other activities until other coordinators emerge. And when all are in place, they
learn to complement one another and to periodically “examine together the strength of the
educational process as a whole”.24 In collaborating with members of the Area Teaching
Committee and with the Auxiliary Board members and their assistants, coordinators—whether
there is one or several—contribute to assessing the progress of the community-building process
and ensuring that the activities in the cluster advance coherently. When, for instance, the Area
Teaching Committee promotes during each cycle a wide range of conversations on the teachings,
the number of people beginning to study the courses can be expected to rise. Equally, when the
coordinator for the main sequence keeps the Committee informed of all the study circles and
institute campaigns occurring, the Committee can draw on the participants to advance the
teaching work.
At the regional or national level, coordinators for the main sequence of courses ensure
that for each cluster there is an arrangement for supporting the tutors and that this arrangement
is not only effective but also adapts and expands in response to growth. In this light, they
ensure the timely appointment of cluster coordinators. By working together with the cluster

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 11

coordinators in the field and bringing them together in reflection meetings, they help these
friends continue to grow in their capacity to support the tutors. Appreciating the need for all
coordinators at the cluster level to benefit from what is being learned across the region or
country, the coordinators organize interactions among cluster coordinators that often involve
visits to clusters where relevant experience is being generated. For a small region or country,
one coordinator may be sufficient. For a larger one, two or more are needed over time and each
may be assigned to a part of the region or country. As is the case at the cluster level, regional or
national coordinators of the main sequence also work closely with the coordinators for the
junior youth programme and the programme for the spiritual education of children while also
collaborating with the Regional Bahá’í Council, if one exists, and the Auxiliary Board
members. Furthermore, they play a critical part in regional or national consultative and
planning processes.
2. THE JUNIOR YOUTH SPIRITUAL EMPOWERMENT PROGRAMME
When in its message dated 27 December 2005 the Universal House of Justice urged all
National Spiritual Assemblies to “consider the junior youth groups formed through programmes
implemented by their training institutes a fourth core activity in its own right”,25 further impetus
was given to the expansion of this vital educational imperative. The progress made since then
has been impressive. Training institutes in almost all national Bahá’í communities worldwide
are now implementing the programme, albeit at varying levels of quantitative and qualitative
development. Globally, over 550,000 young people have already studied at least the first text of
the programme. Those currently engaged exceed 150,000 in more than 17,000 groups. Thousands
of youth, who find in the junior youth programme “an ideal arena in which to assist those
younger than themselves to withstand the corrosive forces that especially target them”,26 are
serving as animators of the groups, and hundreds of them as coordinators or assistants to
coordinators. Although the expansion has been more remarkable in some parts of the world
than in others, junior youth groups have generally found fertile soil across a range of social
realities—from small villages to the neighbourhoods of large metropolitan cities. More than
2,600 clusters with a programme of growth have at least one junior youth group, and some
70 have 30 or more groups, with 300 or more participants.
Notwithstanding the progress made, the capacity to offer the programme in cluster after
cluster has to grow further. Two broad realities are apparent in this regard: clusters where the
friends are striving to establish an intensive programme of growth, where the junior youth
programme may be in its early stages; and clusters where the friends are labouring to embrace
large numbers, where some basic capacity is present on which the friends are building.
Clusters Where the Friends are Establishing an Intensive Programme of Growth
The knowledge garnered from efforts around the world makes it possible to visualize
with greater clarity the path of progress of the junior youth programme in a cluster. Institutes
now have to apply the available understanding in endeavours to firmly establish junior youth
groups in all clusters with a programme of growth. Whether the initial efforts start with young
people from Bahá’í families or those drawn from the wider community, what needs to be
achieved in such clusters may be conceived as helping the local friends develop the basic
capacity required to establish the programme on a sound enough foundation upon which it can
grow to edify hundreds of junior youth and invigorate whole communities. This is no easy task.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 12

Numerically, it often involves engaging and sustaining some 50 to 100 junior youth in about
5 to 10 groups, a capacity that is currently present in some 600 clusters worldwide.
Experience indicates that there are several dimensions to the requisite capacity.
Principally, there emerges in each cluster a growing cadre of friends dedicated to the spiritual
empowerment of junior youth. The growth of the programme is greatly facilitated when these
friends, however few they may be, learn to read accurately the reality of their community and to
identify local factors that might propel the programme or curtail its progress. The friends
become increasingly capable of conversing with the community on the empowerment of the
junior youth, a conversation that draws primarily on the teachings of the Faith about this age
group, most of which is clearly articulated in Book 5 of the sequence of courses. This
conversation also provides opportunity to reflect on certain elements of the culture of the
population that are conducive or contrary to the spiritual empowerment of young people.
Noteworthy too is engaging ever-growing numbers of youth in systematic conversations on
“the contribution they can make to the improvement of their society”27 and on “providing for
the needs of others, particularly for younger generations”.28 Inviting the youth to study institute
courses is an essential aspect that is fostered from the very start, and this is only possible when
capable tutors of Book 5, whether visiting or local, are available to each cluster. The study of
that course is most effective when in determining how to offer it, the conditions of the youth
and their experience are taken into account.
Once a few groups are formed, sustaining them depends on how the animators are
accompanied to learn to facilitate effectively the study of the junior youth texts and to
complement it with artistic activities, social interaction, and service projects. Pairing them with
experienced animators when possible, gathering them in periodic meetings to review the texts,
enabling them to learn from others more experienced, bringing them together in occasions to
study the institute courses and the junior youth texts are all proved to be effective ways in
which they can be supported. If animators are to grow in capacity to not just help junior youth
but also contribute in various ways to bettering their communities, they gradually have to be
assisted to appreciate the full extent of the community-building process unfolding locally and
the context within which the junior youth programme is unfolding.
Helping more and more youth to serve as animators contributes both to an increase in
the number of groups and to the stability and resilience of the programme. With more trained
animators, those that leave can be more easily replaced, and if one animator is unable to
facilitate the study of a particular text, an experienced colleague steps in. When the junior
youth in the groups functioning in a village or neighbourhood, or even in a cluster, are seen as
enrolled into one educational system and their animators as collaborators in supporting all of
them, occasions for coming together to study some of the texts in camps or to implement
service projects together become a more pronounced feature of the programme in a cluster.
The programme is strengthened when those overseeing it in a cluster have explicit and
reasonable expectations of what can be accomplished over the course of a year. Currently nine
texts are available to the junior youth. While it is at present anticipated that the junior youth
will go through at least three texts in the first year, establishing a rhythm of study that guarantees
such progress sometimes proves difficult. This challenge is best met when the way in which
the programme is implemented takes into account the circumstances of the young people—both
junior youth and youth—in the community, the various activities in which they are engaged at
school and at home, the general pattern of life of their community, and the periods during the
year of intense and of relaxed activity. Such understanding sets the stage for how in a cluster

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 13

the junior youth will proceed through the texts during a year—when, for instance, they will
study at a regular pace in their groups and when they will all be brought together in camps for
intensive study and service.
Yet another aspect of capacity to establish a sound and steadily expanding programme in
a cluster is the involvement of the parents and the entire community. The conversations that
occur as a group is formed and continue throughout its life help to build unity of vision, thought,
and action. Occasions when the parents meet and the community gathers to reflect on the
progress and efforts of the junior youth both extend this conversation and inject into the
programme the necessary vitality. When they consult, the parents and the animators explore
together the programme’s underlying concepts, efforts to promote junior youth groups in the
community and with other families, ways to acquire the essential materials, and means to
mobilize resources for camps and other collective endeavours.
As each cluster moves towards the second milestone and beyond, training institutes
everywhere will focus on building the capacity to raise the junior youth programme to this basic
level. To assist them in this regard, the Office of Social and Economic Development at the
Bahá’í World Centre has captured the knowledge and insights thus far generated in a document
titled “Developing the capacity to engage 50 to 100 participants in the junior youth spiritual
empowerment programme”. The remarks above summarize some of the document’s contents.
It is hoped that it will be studied by all the friends promoting the programme at the national,
regional, and cluster levels.
Clusters Where the Friends are Learning to Embrace Large Numbers
In all clusters where the capacity described above is present, the friends are now striving
to cultivate further the associated interrelated abilities. They are enhancing capacity to engage
at least a few hundred junior youth in tens of groups, reaching in this regard some 300 junior
youth in about 30 or so groups. One question before them in this connection is how to increase
capacity to raise growing numbers of animators in neighbourhoods and villages that are
becoming centres of intense activity, some of which may be ripe for enlisting in the groups the
majority, if not all, of the local junior youth. Earlier in the cluster’s development, one or two
tutors of Book 5 may have sufficed to raise the initial cohort of animators. At this point, more
of such tutors are required if growing numbers of youth, and beyond them parents and members
of local institutions, are to study the course. Attention to the quality of the junior youth groups
also becomes more pronounced. Animators are closely accompanied to learn how to
consciously help the junior youth enhance the power of their expression, the acuity of their
perception, and the depth of their interaction. Ongoing and creative thought is given to service
projects initiated by the groups. By drawing other members of the community into these
projects, those initiatives showing great promise are sustained over longer periods. With such
progress, the junior youth programme attracts the support of many of the local people and
leaders who lend a hand through several means. Additionally, opportunities to form junior
youth groups in other settings such as schools and community centres arise over time. In these
various ways every aspect of the learning experience in which the young people are immersed
comes to impact markedly their life and that of the community in general.
Besides accompanying them in their service, youth serving as animators are supported in
other ways as well. In the context of their service to the Faith and the community, they are, for
instance, encouraged in their formal education and assisted to think about the prospects for
tertiary training and for career development before them. During reflection gatherings,

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 14

animators deliberate also on such matters and on other noble aspirations. In this they receive
the aid of not only the institute coordinators but also other institutions and agencies of the Faith,
such as Auxiliary Board members and Local Spiritual Assemblies.
In a community where the programme has reached such a level of quantitative and
qualitative progress, rich conversations on the moral and intellectual well-being of young
people proliferate. These conversations take place in the homes and during occasions such as
devotional gatherings, community meetings, and institutional conferences. They also become
a feature of the expansion phase of the cycle of activities. Gradually, the programme’s
fundamental concepts, aims, and objectives come to be expressed through other means of
communication, for instance, drama, music, or film. Where the programme is operating at
this level, large numbers of animators are sustaining their efforts from year to year and
progressively more youngsters are continuing in the groups for the programme’s three-year
duration. A growing number of them are beginning to enter the main sequence of courses and
to offer acts of service.
As has been mentioned, there are about 70 clusters worldwide where the programme is
reaching this level of development and the friends are involving more than 300 junior youth in
the groups. In some of these clusters the number of participants even exceeds 1,000. Achieving
the progress described above in several hundred more clusters where the friends are learning to
embrace large numbers is an important aspect of the current Plan. The part to be played by
learning sites in this regard is critical, for they ensure that the process of learning associated
with each further stage of the programme’s growth is effectively extended and systematized
in the clusters with which they are associated. And as capacity exists, they collaborate with
training institutes to carry the work to other advanced clusters.
Coordination of Junior Youth Groups
All of these efforts depend on there being at every point in the programme’s advance
a scheme for accompanying animators that matches the need. As the groups multiply and
become more established, the organizational scheme in place evolves in complexity. In the
early stages, the support of an experienced individual from a cluster close by may be adequate.
This is soon supplemented by animators working in teams and the assistance of the more
experienced among them. Eventually one or more coordinators are named from among the
local animators. As they take on their responsibilities they learn from veteran coordinators in
more advanced clusters and collaborate closely with the cluster coordinator of the main
sequence and of children’s classes, if and when they are in place.
At the regional or national level, a coordinator is named usually from among the most
experienced cluster coordinators. As the number of junior youth groups increase across the
region or country, an additional coordinator or two is named. The regional or national
coordinators work with the cluster coordinators in the field and bring them together in meetings
of reflection. Capacity to support the programme advances greatly when a team emerges at the
regional or national level composed of the coordinators and other experienced individuals who,
in collaboration with the Auxiliary Board members, have a clear vision of the growth of the
programme across the entire region or country. As is the case at the cluster level, close
collaboration with the coordinators of the main sequence and the children’s education
programme is an important aspect of the mode of operation at the regional or national level.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 15

Further, for capacity to grow, the institute and the learning site, where one is in place, foster
a dynamic collaboration. The regional or national coordinators and the resource persons work
together in the field and, through such spaces as learning site seminars and institute gatherings,
learn from one another. The knowledge and experience that emerge from the network of
clusters associated with a learning site is transferred to the training institute, and the insights
generated by the training institute in further extending the reach of the programme is shared
with the learning sites.
3. THE PROGRAMME FOR THE SPIRITUAL EDUCATION OF CHILDREN
As the Universal House of Justice has stated, “concern for the spiritual education of
children has long been an element of the culture of the Bahá’í community”.29 Over the last
Plan, the number of children participating in the classes expanded significantly, reaching over
210,000 globally. The growing capacities of institutes to train teachers and assist them to form
classes, and the expanding mechanisms to support their service and progress, are among the
factors that have contributed to such growth. Fundamentally, however, it is the mounting
dedication of individuals and institutions—indeed of the community as a whole—to nurturing
and empowering spiritually its young members that has provided the primary impetus. This is
evident in the fact that the number of children’s classes has increased most in clusters where
junior youth groups have also steadily multiplied.
The current Plan’s objective of intensifying further the community-building process in
5,000 clusters worldwide calls for marked development of the capacity to spiritually educate
children. Some of the particular demands in this regard relate to clusters where the friends are
striving to establish an intensive programme of growth. In most of these clusters, experience
with children’s classes remains largely rudimentary. Other demands are associated with those
clusters where the friends are learning to embrace large numbers, where most children’s classes
are currently found.
Clusters Where the Friends are Establishing an Intensive Programme of Growth
In clusters where the experience of the friends with children’s classes is in its initial
stages, a principal need is establishing a few classes by building organically on whatever
activities are present. From among those engaged in the core activities and the conversations
under way, a few who show interest in teaching children are trained as teachers and assisted to
form the first two or three classes.
In each cluster with a few classes, a small team of teachers is learning how to offer,
lesson after lesson, the first grade, often to children of varying ages. Much more is happening,
however. A conversation on “the value of Bahá’í education and of a proper spiritual
upbringing”30 is being set in motion; the parents and teachers are establishing a collaborative
relationship; and the classes themselves are becoming a means to inspiring other people in the
community who are inclined to this area of service. Further, a team of friends who over time
might assume various duties related to promoting children’s classes is emerging from among
the teachers, the parents, and others.
As the classes grow in both quantity and quality, the institute strengthens its capacity to
train ever-growing numbers of teachers and to help them learn to teach grade after grade.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 16

A basic organizational scheme is gradually built, and a pattern of collaboration among the
teachers, parents, and institutions is progressively put in place.
3.1.1 Raising the first contingent of teachers
Initial efforts to increase the number of friends teaching children include raising tutors in
a country or region who are capable of facilitating effectively the study of Book 3 of the
sequence of courses. Initially most of such individuals are drawn from among the experienced
teachers and tutors in the more advanced clusters. When they learn to offer Book 3 in a manner
that raises the understanding of the participants, enhances their commitment to the education of
children, and sharpens their skills and abilities, the spiritual education of children is established
on a strong footing.
Although the first teachers in a cluster may come from any segment of the population,
young mothers and youth—both boys and girls—tend to be the first to respond. Mothers bring
to the effort their experience of parenting and more readily engage other parents in related
conversations. As for the youth, when they are involved in deep discussions on their
responsibility to the community, they respond especially well when invited to work with
children and junior youth. Building a team of a few mothers and youth who collaborate to
teach the first few classes should be a possibility within the reach of every cluster.
Regarding the training, it is, of course, envisioned that those teaching children would
need to have studied at least the first three courses of the sequence. All the qualities and
abilities treated in these three courses, among them developing spiritual identity and habits,
engaging in systematic conversations, and teaching a simple class of children, are relevant to a
children’s class teacher. Nevertheless, some flexibility in how individuals proceed through
these courses is often necessary in the early stages. Friends interested in teaching children have
sometimes studied the first and third courses, formed classes, and then proceeded to study the
second and other courses. In some instances, forming children’s classes is integrated into the
study of Book 3, so that by the time the teachers finish the course some classes have already
begun. Whatever approach is initially adopted depends on the experience and circumstances
of the people involved, and the support available.
3.1.2 Operation of the classes
At an early stage, the main issues pertaining to the operation of children’s classes include
helping the teachers learn to hold the classes with increasing regularity, become adept at
handling the various components of the lessons in the first grade, and strengthen relationships
with parents. In this regard, the teachers meet often to review the lessons, explore their
principle spiritual objectives, share experiences, and determine how to assist one another. To
continue to grow in capacity, the teachers persist in their study of institute courses. As relevant
experience accrues, the teachers’ commitment to spiritually educating children strengthens, and
so does that of the parents and the community in general. This enables a community to sustain
the initial classes established.
The teachers’ ability to collaborate with parents is another pertinent issue at this initial
stage. Teachers learn to periodically visit parents in their homes to acquaint them with the
progress being made and to elicit whatever assistance is necessary. Efforts to enhance this vital
relationship are seamlessly integrated into the various activities associated with implementing
the programme. For instance, teachers and parents study or review segments of Book 3 together,

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 17

and parents occasionally join the teachers when they come together for reflection. The teachers
and parents are, as a result, increasingly engaged in a conversation that nurtures among them a
deep sense of solidarity. This conversation is gradually extended within the community,
fostering friendship among the families and interactions in various spaces, including devotional
meetings, that serve to attract the hearts of both children and parents to Bahá’u’lláh.
Clusters Where the Friends are Learning to Embrace Large Numbers
In advanced clusters, institutes are building on the capacities so far developed in order to
increase significantly the number of children receiving spiritual education and to organize them
in a systematic programme. The training of teachers is being further augmented; the teachers
are learning to offer the first three grades and higher, as they become available; and the classes
are becoming more formalized. Further, a pattern of coordination able to accompany steadily
expanding numbers of teachers in neighbourhoods and villages is emerging. The development
of children’s classes in these contexts is contributing notably to the community-building process.
3.2.1 The training of teachers and progression of children from grade to grade
Children’s classes multiply significantly as the number of people advancing through the
sequence of courses grows and some among them join the initial group of teachers in spiritually
educating more and more children. This is especially the case in clusters where the friends are
able to engage growing numbers of youth in meaningful conversations and assist them to study
institute courses.
As the teachers learn to organize Grade 1 classes, they continue to advance along the
main sequence of courses. At the same time, they are assisted to study the branch courses of
Book 3 that prepare them to offer the subsequent grades of the classes for which materials are
currently available. The qualities, skills, and abilities of the teachers sharpen further as they are
brought together periodically in reflection gatherings.
The experience acquired from teaching the classes week after week, and the
understanding obtained from participating with others in gatherings for reflection, enable the
teachers to appreciate even further the special nature of the service they are rendering. Their
relationship with the parents of the children grows stronger as they interact with them more
regularly, whether through home visits, special consultative meetings, or reflection gatherings.
In addition, their ability to contribute to the community-building process under way advances
meaningfully when they play a part in various gatherings where the community consults,
reflects, and plans. All these factors combine to strengthen the teachers’ dedication to the
programme’s objectives, sharpen their vision of its development, and consolidate their resolve
to sustain their efforts from year to year.
3.2.2 Further formalization of the classes
Growth in the number of children receiving spiritual education necessitates more
formalization of the classes. Organizing the children into age-based classes, outlining an
annual schedule, and convening special events, such as children’s festivals, are among some
elements of a formal system that receive due attention. While previously the classes may have
included children of different ages, classes for distinct age groups are formed as more teachers
become available within the locality. An annual calendar that is consistent with the pattern of
life of the population is established detailing when during a year the classes generally

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 18

commence, when they take a break, and when they close, even as arrangements are made to
accommodate new classes forming at any time during the year. The calendar might also include
dates for reflection gatherings of teachers and other cluster events that require the participation
of teachers and children. Certain formal meetings are held at particular points during the year
involving teachers, children and their families, members of the institutions, and other interested
individuals in the community. What the children are accomplishing is shared with those
present, the efforts of both the children and teachers are acknowledged, and as the children and
teachers move from one grade to the next, some recognition of this achievement is made.
Further, as the children advance through the classes, those turning 12 are welcomed into the
junior youth programme.
Coordination of Children’s Classes
During the early stages of the programme’s development, teachers, however few they
may be, learn to function as a team that meets regularly. The meetings of the team might
initially be spearheaded by the most experienced among them. Sometimes regional institutes
have assigned to each cluster a veteran teacher or a coordinator from an advanced cluster, or the
Auxiliary Board member might designate a capable assistant, to visit the teachers regularly and
accompany them in their efforts. Dedication mounts among the teachers when they are enabled
to interact with a larger body of their colleagues through gatherings hosted in more advanced
clusters nearby.
As the number of teachers grows and their experience deepens, one among them who has
demonstrated capacity to help others is formally designated as coordinator. Such an individual
might, of course, continue to receive assistance from an experienced coordinator from another
cluster as he or she assumes more formally the tasks of supporting others.
The continued multiplication of the classes in clusters in which the friends are learning to
embrace large numbers in the community-building process places increasing demands on the
system of coordination. Here, the ability of teachers to work in teams requires continued
strengthening, as does the ability of experienced teachers to help new teachers or those starting
to teach a new grade. While one coordinator, perhaps working with a small team of
collaborators, can support 10 to 15 teachers, an additional coordinator is often required as the
number of classes expands further. In any case, an organizational scheme emerges over time in
an advanced cluster which accommodates teams of collaborating teachers, experienced teachers
that help the coordinators support others, and a number of coordinators that ensure that the
classes are being sustained, the teachers are growing in capacity, and the families and the entire
community are appropriately engaged.
At the regional or national level, the major concern is, of course, ensuring that the friends
in each cluster are supported so that, whatever the cluster’s stage of development, children’s
classes increase in both number and effectiveness. Raising tutors of Book 3 and ensuring that
they are available to all clusters is, as demonstrated, an indispensable aspect of the support
provided. Making certain that each cluster is served by some organizational scheme, including
drawing on coordinators and experienced individuals from other clusters as needed, is another.
As coordinators emerge in cluster after cluster, those serving at the regional or national level
assist them in the field and bring them together in reflection gatherings that address questions
relevant to the stage of development of the children’s classes in their cluster. All materials in
sufficient quantities and appropriate languages are provided to the teachers and children at all
ages. Careful attention to the flow of knowledge from advanced clusters where a greater range

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 19

of experience is being generated makes it possible for other clusters to benefit and advance
expeditiously. And, as is the case with the main sequence of courses and the junior youth
programme, over time a team emerges at the regional or national level composed of the
coordinators and other experienced individuals who, in collaboration with the Auxiliary Board
members, grow in capacity to follow the development of the programme.
4. INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY
The progress of each and all of the institute’s programmes ultimately depends on the
strength of the institute as an agency of the Faith operating at the level of a country or region.
There are currently over 300 training institutes worldwide, which range in scope from those in
small countries with a handful of clusters with a programme of growth to those in large regions
where the number of such clusters might exceed 100. In all but a few cases, these institutes
operate under a board of directors. Although in general all boards bear the same responsibilities,
their particular operations vary depending on the range of the institute’s work. At any rate, it is
vital that members of a board, national or regional coordinators, Auxiliary Board members, and
a cadre of believers with the relevant experience learn to collaborate effectively in supporting
the institute’s various responsibilities.
Irrespective of the scope of the work of the institute, the board and those with whom it
closely collaborates in a region or country strive to enhance a number of related institutional
capacities. They endeavour to formulate a clear vision of the progress of the educational
processes, foster capacity to learn systematically and to disseminate the accruing knowledge,
and support a healthy evolution of the institute’s organizational schemes at the cluster and
regional levels. They also labour to raise capable human resources for the institute’s various
purposes, manage effectively financial and material resources, and address pertinent
administrative concerns, especially in relation to institute staff and statistics. The complexity
of each of these issues naturally grows as the community-building process advances in an
increasing number of clusters across a region.
Formulating a Vision
Guidance to foster the growth of the Faith at its current stage of development is, of course,
provided in the messages of the Universal House of Justice. As the friends study the guidance,
read the reality of their country or region, and reflect on their experience, they are able to
formulate a vision centred on advancing the two essential movements at the heart of the process
of growth: the steady flow of individuals through the sequence of courses offered by the
training institute and the movement of clusters along a continuum of development. In the
context of this general vision for the country or region, the institute articulates its own particular
vision for the spiritual education of the friends for the duration of the Plan. This might involve
not only what is possible to accomplish in each cluster with regard to the three educational
imperatives but also the main strategies and approaches to be pursued. The institute then
formulates annually a plan and budget, and every cycle an operational plan. Where capacity for
such methodical planning is well developed, the work of the institute is characterized by clarity
of thought and systematic action. Its lines of action are well-defined, and the deliberations
among the friends at the forefront of its operations are both practical and far-sighted.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 20

Learning and the Ability to Disseminate the Accruing Knowledge
The members of the institute board collaborate with the coordinators, the Auxiliary Board
members, and other experienced individuals in “a systematic and concentrated effort … to
gather and apply insights emerging from the grassroots regarding the promotion of children’s
classes, junior youth groups, and study circles”.31 On their part, regional or national coordinators
labour in the field together with cluster coordinators, converse with them on their experiences,
and observe first hand the emerging strengths and challenges. Regular reflection gatherings
that are informed by what is happening at the grassroots allow for a deep exploration of the
unfolding experience in the region or country. The deliberations and endeavours of coordinators
might for a period of time concentrate on particular sets of questions that are critical to achieving
continued progress. The insights obtained from such focused efforts are then appropriately
analysed and shared with others. A cluster in which significant experience is gained may in this
regard be used to host gatherings of coordinators from other clusters and dispatch experienced
individuals to other clusters to work with local friends in the field. This is an approach to
disseminating learning that has worked well with learning sites for the junior youth programme,
and it is now being applied in some form in the context of groups of adjoining clusters that are
organized around one or more which can offer “a valuable source of knowledge and experience
and represent a reservoir of human resources”.32 Further, some institutes are also capturing
lessons learned by creating documents that serve as dynamic records of efforts to address some
key questions. With some of the knowledge generated globally about learning as a mode of
operation now presented in Book 10, it is hoped that the study of that course will help training
institutes themselves achieve even more notable advances in this capacity.
The Evolution of Organizational Schemes
Those overseeing the work of the institute in a country or region gradually grow in their
understanding of how organizational schemes emerge and evolve as a cluster advances.
The overriding concern, of course, is ensuring that at every stage, a cluster is served by an
appropriate arrangement and that capacity for coordination keeps pace with growth in activity.
This requires that there is at the regional or national level “an acute awareness of circumstances
on the ground”,33 the basis upon which decisions with regard to coordination are then made.
In some clusters, an experienced person from another cluster is assigned to assist the friends.
In others, a few local friends who are showing capacity to assist are accompanying those who
have initiated core activities. In still others, coordinators are formally named, while eventually,
multiple coordinators working in teams, each with a few collaborators, are raised. A regular
review of the organizational arrangements in clusters and groups of clusters across the country
or region, and of the mechanisms in place to provide the necessary support, is an essential
aspect of the responsibilities borne at the national or regional level.
Structures at the national or regional level evolve to attend to these organizational needs
of clusters. Periodic assessment should help those overseeing the institute’s work to determine
in a timely manner when to reinforce or adjust whatever arrangement is in place. When to
name a regional or national coordinator for each of the three educational activities; when, as
activity increases, to appoint additional ones from among those gaining experience in clusters;
how to build teams of friends at the regional level to help follow each programme; when to
assign coordinators to work in parts of the region—are all matters that are progressively
addressed. The latter point requires an additional comment. In large regions where regional
coordinators are assigned to follow a number of clusters or even groups of adjoining clusters,
they are increasingly operating at the level of a sub-region. As a consequence, a distinct

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 21

administrative role at the regional level is emerging, and in some cases an individual is engaged
to support the coordinators operating at the sub-regional level by managing funds, distributing
materials, collating statistics, and organizing reflection gatherings.
Enhancing the Capacity of the Institute Itself
As more and more clusters advance and the work of the institute increases in complexity,
well-defined measures are introduced to help cluster and regional or national coordinators to
grow in capability, heightening their knowledge of the Faith, their understanding of the Plan’s
overarching conceptual framework, and their appreciation of the nature and purpose of the
institute process. Their ability to explore the reality of their region or country, to assess
progress, and to plan effectively can be enhanced, and certain practical abilities such as using
statistical information in reflection and planning and managing judiciously the funds of the
Faith can be developed. Capacities such as building environments of cooperation and unity are
also cultivated. Some of these capacities are acquired naturally through experience as
coordinators are assisted to carry out their work. Institutes identify other practical means to
help coordinators develop necessary abilities. For instance, individuals with relevant experience
can help others; at times the institute can draw on other educational programmes of the Faith
such as those offered by Bahá’í-inspired agencies; and in some cases, coordinators and others
serving the institute full-time have been supported to attend relevant training programmes
offered by various institutions of learning.
In addition, an institute can benefit from the contributions of other individuals with
specialized skills who are involved in the general community-building work of the Faith.
Examples of such skills include translating educational materials, managing finances, and
documenting learning. Through ongoing assessment of the institute’s evolving human resource
needs and review of the measures in place to raise the capacity of the friends serving as staff or
as volunteers, those overseeing the institute’s work determine ways of drawing on the friends
with such abilities.
Managing Effectively the Financial and Material Resources
Managing with care the financial resources pertains to all aspects and levels of the
institute’s operations. When they are planning and budgeting, the friends consider not only
what comes from the Funds of the Faith but also what the local friends and community can
offer through whatever means available to them. On their part, institute boards, in collaboration
with coordinators and Auxiliary Board members, ensure that each activity at the grassroots has
the required resources. In that light, effective channels for the flow of funds from the national
or regional to the cluster level are put in place and simple and straightforward arrangements for
maintaining accurate accounts are made. Awareness that the resources of the friends and the
funds of the Faith are precious and not unlimited generates commitment to efficiency. Financial
management itself is approached with an attitude of learning, and practices such as periodic
budget monitoring and annual financial reporting and auditing are established.
An effective system for the production and distribution of institute materials is, of course,
vital. Sometimes lack of such a system has disrupted the progress of the three educational
imperatives and the vitality of the community-building process itself. Careful thought is to be
given to how the materials are stored and how they are provided to each individual studying the
courses so that unnecessary waste does not occur. Some institutes utilize various approaches in

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 22

this regard. They ensure that cluster coordinators have access to basic storage space and that
when participants can afford to purchase the texts they are encouraged to do so.
Some Administrative Aspects
4.6.1 Remuneration of institute staff
An important aspect of the management of financial resources is the remuneration of
institute staff. As the number of study circles, children’s classes, and junior youth groups
expands in a country or region, more and more people deepen their sense of ownership and
desire to contribute to the betterment of society, and some among them dedicate a substantial
amount of their time to the work of the institute. From among those serving as coordinators,
some might require financial assistance for a period of time. There are a number of principles
to be considered by institutes in this regard. Of course, capacity for coordination cannot be
built by simply multiplying the number of coordinators serving full time and receiving
remuneration. At the cluster level, the remuneration offered to some coordinators is essentially
a short-term arrangement that is arrived at through conversation with each individual being
invited to serve in this manner and requiring such assistance. Based on determined needs,
factors that could be taken into consideration include “whether the person resides in a rural or
urban area, is required to change residence, has a family, or intends to pursue further
education”.34 While decisions made will differ from one person to another, the system will
reflect an overall consistency. Additional considerations may be necessary at the regional or
national level. Some of the friends serving full time and receiving remuneration might, for
instance, need to continue receiving such assistance for an extended period in order to ensure
that the learning processes across the entire region or country are sustained. In any case, it can
be expected that whether at the cluster, regional, or national level, the needs of some individuals
might sometimes “exceed what can reasonably be met by the funds of the Faith”.35 A realistic
range of remuneration can be established. In creating a framework for offering remuneration to
the friends, a National Spiritual Assembly, in consultation with the Counsellors and the institute
board, determines what would, in general, constitute a reasonable period during which an
individual serving as a cluster coordinator or as a regional or national coordinator may be
provided with remuneration.
4.6.2 Managing statistics
The availability of accurate and up-to-date statistical information helps the friends
overseeing the work of the training institute to “remain fully acquainted with developments at
the grassroots and what is being learned in the clusters whose progress they oversee”.36 The
information is, of course, essential in the institute’s planning and decision-making processes.
A proper system for gathering and analysing statistical information requires that effective
instruments are put in place for this purpose, and the Statistical Report Program (SRP) is
helpful in this regard. A new version of this tool—combining its earlier versions and the
Cluster Growth Profile—is already being used in many regions and clusters. Ultimately,
effective management and use of statistics depends on close collaboration between cluster
coordinators and Area Teaching Committees, as well as between national or regional
coordinators and Regional Bahá’í Councils.

Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning

Page 23

The Training Institute Board
As institutes advance as organizational structures, the role of institute boards assumes
ever-greater importance. The members of an institute board are appointed by the National
Spiritual Assembly or Regional Bahá’í Council, in consultation with the Counsellors, usually
for a term of two to three years. Through various means, including meetings and special
occasions for consultation, boards watch over the work of the institutes. They follow the
unfoldment of the learning processes associated with study circles, children’s classes, and junior
youth groups, facilitate the formulation of vision, pay attention to the administrative matters of
institutes, and liaise closely with the Counsellors and with National Assemblies or Regional
Councils, as the case may be. When they are composed of individuals with the requisite
experience and who are personally involved in the community-building process, and when they
are able to foster effective consultative relationships with others, appreciable progress can be
made in a relatively short period of time. Although all do not function in the same way and the
issues they face vary in complexity, growing demands on institutes to continue attaining higher
and higher levels of functioning require that boards too become increasingly capable of
carrying out their responsibilities.

REFERENCES
1

Message dated 29 December 2015 written by the
Universal House of Justice to the Conference of
the Continental Boards of Counsellors.
2
Ibid.
3
Ibid.
4
Message dated 12 December 2011 written by the
Universal House of Justice to all National
Spiritual Assemblies.
5
Message dated 29 December 2015.
6
Riḍván 2010 message written by the Universal
House of Justice to the Bahá’ís of the world.
7
Ibid.
8
Ibid.
9
Message dated 28 December 2010 written by the
Universal House of Justice to the Conference of
the Continental Boards of Counsellors.
10
Riḍván 2010 message.
11
Ibid.
12
Message dated 29 December 2015.
13
Riḍván 2010 message.
14
Ibid.
15
Message dated 29 December 2015.
16
Ibid.
17
Ibid.
18
Ibid.
19
Ibid.

20

Message dated 27 December 2005 written by
the Universal House of Justice to the
Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors.
21
Message dated 12 December 2011.
22
“Training Institutes” (A document prepared for
and approved by the Universal House of Justice,
April 1998).
23
Letter dated 24 December 2014 written on
behalf of the Universal House of Justice to a
National Spiritual Assembly.
24
Message dated 12 December 2011.
25
Message dated 27 December 2005.
26
Message dated 29 December 2015.
27
Ibid.
28
Ibid.
29
Riḍván 2010 message.
30
Riḍván 1996 message written by the Universal
House of Justice to the followers of Bahá’u’lláh
in Western and Central Asia.
31
Message dated 29 December 2015.
32
Ibid.
33
Message dated 28 December 2010.
34
Ibid.
35
Ibid.
36
Message dated 29 December 2015.

