Framework
for Action
Selected Messages of
the Universal House of Justice
and Supplementary Material

2006–2016

Palabra Publications

Copyright © 2017 by Palabra Publications
All rights reserved. Published April 2017.
ISBN 978-1-890101-29-9
Palabra Publications
7369 Westport Place
West Palm Beach, Florida 33413
U.S.A.
1-561-697-9823
1-561-697-9815 (fax)
books@Palabrapublications.info
www.palabrapublications.com

Contents

Contents

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
PART I
Selected Messages of the Universal House of Justice
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

27 December 2005, to the Conference of the
Continental Boards of Counsellors regarding the Five Year
Plan, 2006–2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
28 December 2005, to all National Spiritual
Assemblies regarding the training institute and
the materials of the Ruhi Institute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
31 December 2005, to the Bahá’ís of the World
marking the close of the Conference of the
Continental Board of Counsellors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Rid.ván 2006, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . . 23
25 March 2007, to the Bahá’ís of the World
regarding the Bahá’í electoral process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Rid.ván 2007, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . . 35
9 September 2007, to the Bahá’í students
deprived of access to higher education in Iran. . . . . . . . 39
26 November 2007, to the Bahá’ís of the World,
paying tribute to the Hands of the Cause of God . . . . . 45
18 February 2008, to the Friends of Iran regarding
the Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice . . 51
Rid.ván 2008, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . . 61
20 October 2008, to the Bahá’ís of the World,
calling for 41 regional conferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Rid.ván 2009, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . . 71
1 January 2010, to the Friends Gathered at the
Youth Conference in the United Kingdom . . . . . . . . . . 73
Rid.ván 2010, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . . 75
29 August 2010, regarding the centenary of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s departure for His visit to the West. . . . . 93
28 December 2010, to the Conference of the
Continental Board of Counsellors regarding the
Five Year Plan, 2011–2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  95
i

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

17. 1 January 2011, to the Bahá’ís of the World
regarding the Five Year Plan, 2011–2016 . . . . . . . . . . 121
18. Rid.ván 2011, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . 123
19. 23 May 2011, to the Bahá’ís of the World
regarding pioneering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
20. 12 December 2011, to all National Spiritual
Assemblies regarding training institutes . . . . . . . . . . . 129
21. Rid.ván 2012, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . 139
22. 8 February 2013, to the Bahá’ís of the World
announcing the convocation of 95 youth
conferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
23. 2 March 2013, to the Bahá’ís of Iran
regarding the principle of noninvolvement in
partisan politics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
24. Rid.ván 2013, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . 161
25. 1 May 2013, to the Bahá’ís of the World
announcing 19 additional youth conferences . . . . . . . 169
26. 16 May 2013, to the delegates gathered at
Bahá’í National Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
27. 1 July 2013, to the participants in the forthcoming
114 youth conferences throughout the world . . . . . . . 175
28. 5 December 2013, to the Bahá’ís of the World
regarding the centenary of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s return
to the Holy Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
29. 29 January 2014, to the Bahá’í youth in the
Cradle of the Faith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
30. Rid.ván 2014, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . 187
31. 10 July 2014, to the Bahá’ís of the World
regarding the implementation of the Badí‘ calendar . . 191
32. 1 August 2014, to the Bahá’ís of the World
regarding the progress of the construction of
Houses of Worship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
33. 1 October 2014, to the Bahá’ís of Iran regarding
their ennobling response to oppression . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
34. Rid.ván 2015, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . 205
35. 29 December 2015, to the Conference of the
Continental Board of Counsellors regarding the
Five Year Plan, 2016–2021 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
36. 2 January 2016, to the Bahá’ís of the World
regarding the Five Year Plan, 2016–2021 . . . . . . . . . . 235

ii

Contents

37. 26 March 2016, to the Bahá’ís of the world
acting under the Mandate of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá . . . . . . . . . 237
38. 26 March 2016, to the chosen recipients of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s Tablets of the Divine Plan,
the Bahá’ís of the United States and the Bahá’ís
of Canada. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
39. Rid.ván 2016, to the Bahá’ís of the World . . . . . . . . . . 243
PART II
Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf
of the Universal House of Justice
40. 11 August 2008, to an individual Bahá’í regarding
the responsibilities of Local Spiritual Assemblies. . . . . 249
41. 30 September 2008, to an individual Bahá’í
regarding firesides, deepening, proclamation,
travelling teaching, and retaining Local Assemblies
in remote areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
42. 23 December 2008, to an individual Bahá’í
regarding participating in political activity,
social change, and public policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255
43. 4 January 2009, to the National Spiritual Assembly
of Australia, regarding centers of Bahá’í learning . . . . 259
44. 15 March 2009, to an individual Bahá’í
regarding the institute process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
45. 17 May 2009, to all National Spiritual Assemblies
regarding the Nineteen Day Feast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265
46. 20 November 2009, to the Spiritual Assembly of
Malaysia regarding Regional Councils . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
47. 28 February 2010, to the National Spiritual Assembly
of Papua New Guinea regarding the processes of
social and economic development and expansion
and consolidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
48. 13 February 2011, to an individual Bahá’í
regarding what Shoghi Effendi termed the
“double crusade” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
49. 10 April 2011, to an individual Bahá’í concerning
efforts to eliminate racial prejudice in the light
of the framework of action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
50. 9 August 2012, to the National Spiritual Assembly
of the United States regarding Regional Councils
and fostering dynamics of growth in clusters . . . . . . . 283
iii

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

51. 19 April 2013, to three believers conveying guidance
on adhering to Bahá’í standards of morality . . . . . . . . 289
52. 23 April 2013, to the National Spiritual Assembly
of Denmark regarding the upholding of Bahá’í
moral standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295
53. 23 July 2013, to the National Spiritual Assembly
of India on enhancing institutional capacity to
collect and utilize statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
54. 24 July 2013, to the National Spiritual Assembly
of Canada regarding the role of the Association
of Bahá’í Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
55. 17 February 2014, to an individual believer
concerning obstacles to the progress of the Plan,
including dichotomous thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307
56. 24 December 2014, to the National Spiritual
Assembly of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
regarding the scheme of coordination in advanced
clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
57. 5 January 2015, to the National Spiritual Assembly
of the United States regarding the reinvigoration
of the training institute and establishing strong
Area Teaching Committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
58. 9 October 2015, to a National Spiritual Assembly
regarding the medium of the Internet and the
promotion of the Faith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
PART III
Supplementary Material
59. 26 November 2012, “Social Action,” a document
prepared by the Office of Social and Economic
Development at the Bahá’í World Centre . . . . . . . . . . 327
60. April 2013, “Insights from the Frontiers of
Learning,” a document prepared by the
International Teaching Centre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
61. January 2017, “Training Institutes: Attaining a Higher
Level of Functioning,” a document prepared by the
International Teaching Centre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421

iv

Preface

Preface

A

SECOND DECADE HAS PASSED since the introduction
of the Four Year Plan, when the Universal House of
Justice set the Bahá’í world on an unprecedented course
of action. Those four years marked “an extraordinary period in
the history of our Faith, a turning point of epochal magnitude,”
and that Plan acquired “a special place in the scheme of Bahá’í
and world history.” Since 1996, the Bahá’í world has pursued a
series of Plans that would take it to the end of the first century
of the Formative Age, and each of these Plans contributed in
its own unique way to the pursuit of a single, overarching aim:
advancing the process of entry by troops.
Much of the guidance provided by the Universal House of
Justice to the Bahá’í world in the first decade after 1996 was
captured in the book Turning Point. This volume, Framework
for Action, organized in much the same way, covers the past
decade from 2006–2016. Its three parts include messages from
the House of Justice, letters written on its behalf, and supplementary materials.
In the past ten years, the systematic efforts of the Bahá’í
community—reinforced by a learning process involving study,
consultation, action, and reflection that stretches from the
grass roots in neighborhoods and villages worldwide to the
international level—have grown stronger, deeper, and more
complex. In 2006, at the end of the first of a series of four Five
Year Plans, only the first glimmerings of an intensive program
of growth had emerged, and a new pattern of action was
consolidated in but a few score clusters. The first elements of an
evolving framework for action had just emerged, which, in the
past decade, has been more fully understood, elaborated, and
exploited. Among the many important concepts and practices
that received attention over this period were the systematization of cycles of growth, the learning mode, the functioning of
the Auxiliary Boards, the training institute as an educational
process with three distinct stages, institutional capacity at the
cluster and regional levels, the movement of youth, accompaniment, a coherent life of service, social action, involvement
in the discourses of society, and universal participation. The
movement of clusters along a developmental path marked by a

v

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

series of milestones has now become well understood, such that
some two hundred clusters have been able to create a pattern
of community life that embraces a thousand or thousands,
while some five thousand additional clusters follow in this well-­
defined pattern of action. On the horizon, a fourth milestone,
as yet undefined, anticipating a breakthrough in the movement
of populations, beckons. At all levels from neighborhoods
to nations, thoughtful individuals and institutions from the
wider society are increasingly expressing appreciation for the
contribution Bahá’ís are making to address the needs of society.
Thus, although much remains to be done in the fast fleeting
years of the end of the first century of the Formative Age, the
essential challenge that the Bahá’í world faced in 1996 has
already been well met. The process of entry by troops, which
began in the Ten Year Crusade during the final years of the
life of Shoghi Effendi, and which brought him so much joy,
labored on for four decades as the Bahá’í world tried to resolve
the challenge of attaining a balance between the processes of
expansion and consolidation. Membership grew to more than
five million by 1996, but where rapid growth took place, community building could not keep pace, and where communities
and institutions grew strong, substantial growth was often unrealized. Thus, at the start of the Four Year Plan, the House of
Justice called upon individuals, communities, and institutions to
come together in a new mode of action that would harmonize
expansion and consolidation in a systematic and sustainable
pattern of action. The House of Justice described the essence of
the challenge at that time:
With the growth in the number of enrollments, it
has become apparent that such occasional courses of
instruction and the informal activities of community life,
though important, are not sufficient as a means of human
resource development, for they have resulted in only a relatively small band of active supporters of the Cause. These
believers, no matter how dedicated, no matter how willing
to make sacrifices, cannot attend to the needs of hundreds,
much less thousands, of fledgling local communities.
Systematic attention has to be given by Bahá’í institutions
to training a significant number of believers and assisting
them in serving the Cause according to their God-given
talents and capacities. (26 December 1995)

vi

Preface

Whereas in 1996 there was no place where a sustainable
pattern of large-scale growth and development was evident, it is
now understood clearly how such a pattern works; if the efforts
demonstrated in the most advanced clusters are replicated in
the five thousand where work is under way, they would easily
encompass five million people and more. With this knowledge
in hand and the assurance of much more learning to come, the
Bahá’í world can confidently commit itself to the tasks in the
present Plan and those that lie immediately ahead, which will
take us to the end of the second Bahá’í century. Against the
backdrop of the forces of disintegration and integration shaping
the destiny of humanity, the Faith is destined in the uncharted
decades ahead to experience the fruition of the great stages of
growth set out by Shoghi Effendi at the start of the Ten Year
Crusade:
Such a steady flow of reinforcements is absolutely
vital and is of extreme urgency, for nothing short of the
vitalizing influx of new blood that will reanimate the world
Bahá’í community can safeguard the prizes which, at so
great a sacrifice involving the expenditure of so much time,
effort and treasure, are now being won in virgin territories
by Bahá’u’lláh’s valiant Knights, whose privilege is to
constitute the spearhead of the onrushing battalions which,
in diverse theaters and in circumstances often adverse and
extremely challenging, are vying with each other for the
spiritual conquest of the unsurrendered territories and
islands on the surface of the globe.
This flow, moreover, will presage and hasten the advent
of the day which, as prophesied by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, will
witness the entry by troops of peoples of divers nations
and races into the Bahá’í world—a day which, viewed in its
proper perspective, will be the prelude to that long-awaited
hour when a mass conversion on the part of these same
nations and races, and as a direct result of a chain of events,
momentous and possibly catastrophic in nature, and which
cannot as yet be even dimly visualized, will suddenly revolutionize the fortunes of the Faith, derange the equilibrium
of the world, and reinforce a thousandfold the numerical
strength as well as the material power and the spiritual
authority of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh.

vii

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

A century has now passed since ‘Abdu’l-Bahá revealed
the Tablets of the Divine Plan. How much the Bahá’í world
has grown in size, complexity, and capacity since a handful of
immortal souls took the first steps to transform His vision into
reality! We are the heirs and trustees of this priceless Divine
Charter whose execution now depends upon our understanding
and action in the years to come—years that will surely be
marked by crisis and victory. In various passages He implored
His loved ones: “Now you must become heavenly farmers and
scatter pure seeds in the prepared soil. The harvest of every
other seed is limited, but the bounty and the blessing of the
seed of the Divine Teachings is unlimited. Throughout the
coming centuries and cycles many harvests will be gathered. . . .
[O]ne grain will become seven hundred; and if God so wills He
will double these also.” “Behold the portals which Bahá’u’lláh
hath opened before you! Consider how exalted and lofty is
the station you are destined to attain, how unique the favors
with which you have been endowed.” “I fervently hope that in
the near future the whole earth may be stirred and shaken by
the results of your achievements.” “O that I could travel, even
though on foot and in the utmost poverty, to these regions,
and, raising the call of ‘Yá Bahá’u’l-Abhá’ in cities, villages,
mountains, deserts and oceans, promote the Divine Teachings!
This, alas, I cannot do. How intensely I deplore it! Please God,
ye may achieve it.”
Palabra Publications
March 8, 2017

viii

PART I
Messages of the
Universal House of Justice

1
27 December 2005
To the Conference of the Continental Boards of Counsellors
Dearly loved Friends,
Over the past four and a half years, as the believers
throughout the world have striven to pursue the aim of advancing the process of entry by troops, it has become increasingly
clear that the close of the present Five Year Plan will mark a
decisive moment in the unfoldment of the historical enterprise
on which the community of the Greatest Name is embarked.
The elements required for a concerted effort to infuse the
diverse regions of the world with the spirit of Bahá’u’lláh’s
Revelation have crystallized into a framework for action that
now needs only to be exploited.
Our 26 December 1995 message, which focused the Bahá’í
world on a path of intense learning about the sustained, rapid
growth of the Faith, described in general terms the nature of
the work that would have to be undertaken in meeting the
challenges ahead. As a first step, Bahá’í communities were urged
to systematize their efforts to develop the human resources
of the Cause through a network of training institutes. While
every national community took measures to create institutional capacity to perform this essential function, it was not
until the outset of the Five Year Plan that the significance of a
well-conceived program of training became widely appreciated.
The introduction of the concept of the cluster made it possible
for the friends to think about the accelerated growth of the
community on a manageable scale and to conceive of it in terms
of two complementary, reinforcing movements: the steady flow
of individuals through the sequence of institute courses and
the movement of clusters from one stage of development to
the next. This image helped the believers to analyze the lessons
being learned in the field and to employ a common vocabulary
to articulate their findings. Never before have the means for
3

1.1

1.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

1.3

establishing a pattern of activity that places equal emphasis on
the twin processes of expansion and consolidation been better
understood. Indeed, so consistent has been the experience with
intensive programs of growth, implemented on the basis of this
understanding in divers clusters, that no cause for equivocation
remains. The way forward is clear, and at Rid.ván 2006 we will
call upon the believers to steel their resolve and to proceed with
the full force of their energies on the course that has been so
decidedly set.
In presenting to you the features of the coming Five Year
Plan, the subject of your deliberations in this conference, we
will review the record of recent accomplishments of the Bahá’í
world and indicate how current approaches, methods and
instruments should be carried to this next stage. What the
­
analy­sis will make evident is that the wholehearted response of
the individual believer, the community and the institutions to
the guidance they received five years ago has raised their capacity to new levels. The continued development of this ­capacity
will remain essential to the aim of advancing the process of
entry by troops—the focus of the Bahá’í world through the final
years of the first century of the Formative Age.

The Individual
1.4

1.5

There is little need to describe in detail the achievements
of the individual believer, for we have already noted these in
our message of 17 January 2003 to the Bahá’ís of the world.
In that message we highlighted the growing sense of initiative
and resourcefulness, as well as the courage and audacity, that
have come to characterize believers everywhere. Qualities such
as consecration, zeal, confidence and tenacity attest to the
enhanced vitality of their faith. We have also acknowledged
the role played by the training institute in evoking the spirit of
enterprise underlying the rise in activity observed around the
world—the concrete expression of that vitality.
Developments since then have served only to demonstrate
further the efficacy of a sequence of courses that seeks to build
capacity for service by concentrating on the application of
the spiritual insights gained through profound study of the
Writings. Participants are exposed to a body of knowledge
that fosters a set of related habits, attitudes and qualities and
are assisted in sharpening certain skills and abilities needed to
carry out acts of service. Discussions that revolve around the
4

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Creative Word, in the serious and uplifting atmosphere of a
study circle, raise the level of consciousness about one’s duties
to the Cause and create an awareness of the joy one derives
from teaching the Faith and serving its interests. The spiritual
context in which specific deeds are addressed endows them
with significance. Confidence is patiently built as the friends
engage in progressively more complex and demanding acts of
service. Yet, above all, it is reliance on God that sustains them
in their endeavors. How abundant the accounts of believers
who enter the teaching field with trepidation only to find
themselves bolstered by confirmations on all sides. Seeing the
possibilities and opportunities before them with new eyes,
they witness firsthand the power of Divine assistance, as they
strive to put into practice what they are learning and achieve
results far exceeding their expectations. That the spirit of faith
born out of intimate contact with the Word of God has such
an effect on souls is by no means a new phenomenon. What
is heartening is that the institute process is helping such large
numbers experience the transforming potency of the Faith. To
extend this edifying influence to hundreds of thousands more
should be the object of intense effort over the next five years.
A discernible outcome of the emphasis on capacity building
has been a steady increase in the exercise of individual initiative—initiative that is disciplined by an understanding of the
requirements of systematic action in advancing the process of
entry by troops. Endeavors are pursued in a humble posture of
learning within the framework defined by the Plan. As a result,
activities that give expression to a diversity of talents become
harmonized into one forward movement, and the stagnation
caused by endless debate over personal preferences about
approach is avoided. Commitment to long-term action grows,
putting in context the initiatives undertaken by the believers at
any particular moment.
Nowhere has the rise in individual initiative been more
clearly demonstrated than in the field of teaching. Whether in
the form of firesides or study circles, individual efforts to teach
the Faith are indisputably on the increase. Equipped with skills
and methods, effective and accessible to all, and encouraged by
the response their actions elicit, the believers are entering into
closer association with people of many walks of life, engaging
them in earnest conversation on themes of spiritual import.
With greater and greater spiritual perception, they are able to
5

1.6

1.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

1.8

sense receptivity and recognize thirst for the vivifying waters of
Bahá’u’lláh’s message. From among all those they encounter—
parents of neighborhood children, peers at school, colleagues
at work, casual acquaintances—they seek out souls with whom
they can share a portion of that which He has so graciously
bestowed on humanity. Increased experience enables them
to adapt their presentation to the seeker’s needs, employing
direct teaching methods that draw on the Writings to offer the
message in a manner both forthcoming and inviting.
Most noteworthy in this regard is the spirit of initiative
shown by believers who extend the range of their endeavors
to assist others also striving to tread a path of service. Having
acquired the capacity to serve as tutors of institute courses,
they take up the challenge of accompanying participants in
their initial attempts to perform acts of service until they, too,
are ready to start their own study circles and help others do the
same, widening in this way the scope of the institute’s influence
and bringing eager souls into contact with the Word of God.
This particular aspect of the institute process, which serves
to multiply the number of active supporters of the Faith in a
self-perpetuating manner, holds much promise, and we hope
that its potential will be realized in the coming Plan. “Let him
not be content,” are the words of the Guardian referring to every teacher of the Cause, “until he has infused into his spiritual
child so deep a longing as to impel him to arise independently,
in his turn, and devote his energies to the quickening of other
souls, and the upholding of the laws and principles laid down
by his newly adopted Faith.”

The Community
1.9

The enhanced vitality that distinguishes the life of the
individual believer is equally evident in Bahá’í community life.
The degree to which this vitality manifests itself depends, of
course, on the stage of development of the cluster. A cluster
in an advanced stage of growth offers far greater insight into
what can be achieved than one in an earlier stage, where the
friends are still struggling to translate the provisions of the Plan
into action. It is to these more advanced clusters, then, that we
must look in analyzing the accomplishments of the community,
convinced that their experience will be emulated by others as
they continue to progress.

6

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

On several occasions we have made reference to the
coherence that is brought to the process of growth through
the establishment of study circles, devotional meetings and
children’s classes. The steady multiplication of core activities,
propelled by the training institute, creates a sustainable pattern
of expansion and consolidation that is at once structured and
organic. As seekers join these activities and declare their faith,
individual and collective teaching endeavors gather momentum.
Through the effort made to ensure that a percentage of the
new believers enroll in the institute courses, the pool of human
resources required to carry out the work of the Faith swells.
When strenuously pursued in a cluster, all of this activity
eventually brings about conditions favorable for launching an
intensive program of growth.
What a close examination of clusters at this threshold
confirms is that the coherence thus achieved extends to various
aspects of community life. The study and application of the
teachings become a pervasive habit, and the spirit of communal
worship generated by devotional meetings begins to permeate
the community’s collective endeavors. A graceful integration of
the arts into diverse activities enhances the surge of energy that
mobilizes the believers. Classes for the spiritual education of
children and junior youth serve to strengthen the roots of the
Faith in the local population. Even an act of service as simple
as visiting the home of a new believer, whether in a village in
the Pacific Islands or in a vast metropolitan area like London,
reinforces ties of fellowship that bind the members of the community together. Conceived as a means for exposing believers
to the fundamentals of the Faith, “home visits” are giving rise
to an array of deepening efforts, both individual and collective,
in which the friends are delving into the Writings and exploring
their implications for their lives.
As the spiritual foundations of the community are fortified
in this way, the level of collective discourse is raised, social
relations among the friends take on new meaning, and a sense
of common purpose inspires their interactions. Little wonder,
then, that a study carried out by the International Teaching
Centre shows that, in some fifty advanced clusters surveyed, the
quality of the Nineteen Day Feast has improved. Other reports
indicate that contributions to the Fund have increased as consciousness of its spiritual significance expands and the need for
material means is better understood. Reflection meetings at the
7

1.10

1.11

1.12

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

1.13

1.14

1.15

cluster level are becoming a forum for the discussion of needs
and plans, creating a collective identity and strengthening the
collective will. Where such advanced clusters are flourishing, the
influence they exert begins to spread beyond their own borders
to enrich regional events, such as summer and winter schools.
As in the case of the individual, learning is the hallmark of
this phase of the development of the community. You and your
auxiliaries are urged to exert every effort in the coming years
to ensure that, in cluster after cluster, learning is woven into the
fabric of decision making.
One of your primary concerns will be to strengthen appreciation for systematic action, already heightened by the successes
it has brought. To arrive at a unified vision of growth based on
a realistic assessment of possibilities and resources, to develop
strategies that lend structure to it, to devise and implement
plans of action commensurate with capacity, to make necessary
adjustments while maintaining continuity, to build on accomplishments—these are some of the requisites of systematization
that every community must learn and internalize.
By the same token, desire and willingness to open certain aspects of community life to the wider public should be integrated
into a pattern of behavior that attracts souls and confirms them.
Much has been achieved in this respect as the friends have
adopted new ways of thinking and acting at a collective level.
In welcoming large numbers into its embrace, the community
is learning to see more readily the latent potentiality in people
and to avoid setting artificial barriers for them based on preconceived notions. A nurturing environment is being cultivated
in which each individual is encouraged to progress at his or her
own pace without the pressure of unreasonable expectations.
At the heart of such developments is a growing awareness of
the implications of the universality and comprehensiveness of
the Faith. Collective action is governed more and more by the
principle that Bahá’u’lláh’s message should be given liberally
and unconditionally to humanity. Most gratifying are the
endeavors being made to reach receptive populations with the
teachings of the Faith. As unrelenting social and political forces
continue to uproot people from their homelands and sweep
them across continents, an uncompromising appreciation for a
diversity of backgrounds and for the strength it confers on the
whole will prove crucial to the expansion and consolidation of
the community.
8

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Perhaps the task that will occupy the attention of you and
your auxiliaries above all others is to assist the community in its
effort to maintain focus. This ability, slowly acquired through
successive Plans, represents one of its most valuable assets,
hard won through discipline, commitment and foresight as the
friends and their institutions have learned to pursue the single
aim of advancing the process of entry by troops. On the one
hand, you will find it necessary to discourage the tendency to
confuse focus with uniformity or exclusivity. To maintain focus
does not imply that special needs and interests are neglected,
much less that essential activities are dropped in order to
accommodate others. Clearly, there are a host of elements
that comprise Bahá’í community life, shaped over the decades,
which must be further refined and developed. On the other
hand, you will want to take every opportunity to reinforce the
disposition to prioritize—one which recognizes that not all
activities have the same importance at a given stage of growth,
that some must necessarily take precedence over others, that
even the most well-intentioned proposals can cause distraction,
dissipate energy or impede progress. What should be plainly
acknowledged is that the time available for the friends to serve
the Faith in every community is not without limits. It is only
natural to expect that the preponderating share of this limited
resource would be expended in meeting the provisions of the
Plan.

1.16

The Institutions
None of the accomplishments of the individual or the
community could be sustained without the guidance, encouragement and support of the third participant in the Plan—the
institutions of the Faith. It is heartening to see to what extent
the institutions are promoting individual initiative, channeling
energies into the teaching field, underscoring the value of systematic action, fostering the spiritual life of the community and
nurturing a welcoming environment. In helping the community
to remain focused on the aim of the Plan, they are learning
in practical terms what it means to maintain unity of vision
among the friends, to put mechanisms in place that facilitate
their endeavors and to allocate resources in accordance with
priorities wisely set. These priorities include, of course, areas of
activity that require the specialized skills of individuals. Worthy
of particular mention in this category are the work of external
9

1.17

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

1.18

1.19

affairs, which National Spiritual Assemblies are following
diligently, and ventures of social and economic development,
as, for example, undertaken by Bahá’í-inspired organizations.
While tending to needs of this kind, the institutions find
themselves increasingly capable of directing the thrust of the
effort exerted by the generality of the believers towards the
prosecution of the central tasks of the Plan.
Encouraging, too, are the determined steps being taken
by National Spiritual Assemblies, in collaboration with the
Counsellors, to respond to the administrative challenges
brought by large-scale growth at the cluster level. Schemes that
are emerging tend to call for one or more individuals named
by the training institute to coordinate the delivery of courses
in the main sequence, as well as programs for children and
junior youth. An Area Teaching Committee appointed by the
Regional Council, or by the National Assembly itself, is also
required to administer other aspects of systematic effort to
achieve accelerated expansion and consolidation. Auxiliary
Board members work on both fronts to ensure that the two
movements which have come to characterize the process of
growth proceed unhampered. While these various components
are being established in cluster after cluster, there is still much
to be learned about the functions each is to perform and about
the relationships among them. What is important is that the
current degree of flexibility, which allows for the creation of
new instruments as needed, not be compromised so that the
scheme of coordination represents a response to the demands
of growth itself. We count on you and National Assemblies to
guide this learning process.
Throughout the Plan, we have watched with the keenest
interest the effects of these developments on the functioning of
Local Spiritual Assemblies. It gives us pleasure to note that two
types of progress are being made in this respect. In those clusters
where most of the Local Assemblies have been extremely weak,
a growing number are gradually assuming their responsibilities
as they learn to guide specific activities of the Plan in the areas
under their jurisdiction. At the same time, long-standing Local
Spiritual Assemblies are exhibiting signs of added strength as
they have come to embrace a vision of systematic growth—this,
often following a period of adjustment in which some struggled
to understand the new realities being created at the cluster level.

10

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

What has brought us particular joy is to see that the process
of growth unfolding around the world is gathering momentum
in urban centers as well as rural areas. An important step
taken in many large cities early in the current Plan was to
divide them into sectors. This proved crucial to planning for
sustained growth. As communities expand, however, it is not
unreasonable to expect that cities will need to be divided into
smaller areas—perhaps ultimately into neighborhoods—in each
of which the Nineteen Day Feast is conducted. Maintaining a
vision of the potential size of future communities is essential
for the further development of Local Assemblies. To administer
the affairs of communities whose membership will swell into
the thousands, and to fulfill their purpose as the “trusted ones
of the Merciful among men,” those who serve on Spiritual
Assemblies will necessarily undergo intense periods of learning
in the years ahead. We intend to monitor the development of
Local Spiritual Assemblies closely during the coming Plan and,
as the size of the Bahá’í population and other circumstances in
a locality demand, authorize a two-stage electoral process on
a case-by-case basis, following the pattern developed in T.ihrán
during the ministry of the Guardian.

1.20

Intensive Programs of Growth
Sustained endeavor on the part of the individual, the community and the institutions to accelerate the institute process in
a cluster, while contributing to its movement from one stage of
development to another through well-proven means, culminates
in the launching of an intensive program of growth. Indeed,
the most significant advances in learning during the present
Plan resulted from efforts in some two hundred clusters to
implement such programs. We are convinced that this learning
can now be systematically propagated in every continent, and at
Rid.ván 2006 we will call upon Bahá’ís worldwide to establish,
during the next Plan, intensive programs of growth in no less
than 1,500 clusters.
As currently conceived, an intensive program of growth
is straightforward, simple and effective, but implies a level of
exertion that tests the resolve of the friends. Conforming well
to the vision we presented five years ago, it employs a few
measures that have proven to be indispensable to large-scale
expansion and consolidation. It consists of cycles of activity, in
general of three months’ duration each, which proceed accord11

1.21

1.22

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

1.23

1.24

1.25

ing to distinct phases of expansion, consolidation, reflection
and planning.
The expansion phase, often a period of two weeks, demands
the highest level of intensity. Its objective is to widen the circle
of those interested in the Faith, to find receptive souls and to
teach them. Although this phase might include some element
of proclamation, it should not be seen as a time to hold a few
events for this purpose or to undertake a set of activities that
merely convey information. Experience suggests that the more
closely teaching approaches and methods are aligned with the
capacity acquired from the study of the institute courses the
more rewarding the results.
Plans being devised for this phase invariably involve the
implementation of carefully designed teaching projects and
campaigns of home visits and firesides, often through the
mobilization of teaching teams. The pattern of expansion that
unfolds, however, varies from cluster to cluster. Where the
population has traditionally shown a high degree of receptivity
to the Faith, a rapid influx of new believers is to be expected. In
one cluster of this kind, for example, the goal of enrolling fifty
souls over a three-week period in a locality was surpassed by
the second day, and the team wisely decided to end the expansion phase in anticipation of activities related to consolidation.
One of the primary objectives of this next phase is to bring a
percentage of the new believers into the institute process so that
an adequate pool of human resources will be available in future
cycles to sustain growth. Those not participating in study circles
are nurtured through a series of home visits, and all are invited
to devotional meetings, to the celebration of the Nineteen
Day Feast and to Holy Day observances and are gradually
introduced to the patterns of community life. Not infrequently,
the consolidation phase gives rise to further enrollments as the
family members and friends of new declarants accept the Faith.
In other clusters, enrollments during the expansion phase
may not be high, especially in the first few cycles, and the goal
is to augment the number of those willing to participate in core
activities. This, then, defines the nature of the consolidation
phase, which largely involves nurturing the interest of seekers
and accompanying them in their spiritual search until they are
confirmed in their faith. To the extent that these measures are
vigorously followed, this phase can generate a considerable
number of enrollments. It should be noted, however, that as
12

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

learning advances and experience is gained, the ability not only
to teach responsive souls, but also to identify segments of the
general population with heightened receptivity, develops, and
the totality of new believers increases from cycle to cycle.
Whatever the nature of the cluster, it is imperative to
pay close attention to children and junior youth everywhere.
Concern for the moral and spiritual education of young people
is asserting itself forcefully on the consciousness of humanity,
and no attempt at community building can afford to ignore it.
What has become especially apparent during the current Five
Year Plan is the efficacy of educational programs aimed at the
spiritual empowerment of junior youth. When accompanied for
three years through a program that enhances their spiritual perception, and encouraged to enter the main sequence of institute
courses at the age of fifteen, they represent a vast reservoir of
energy and talent that can be devoted to the advancement of
spiritual and material civilization. So impressed are we by the
results already achieved, and so compelling is the need, that we
will urge all National Assemblies to consider the junior youth
groups formed through programs implemented by their training
institutes a fourth core activity in its own right and to promote
its wide-scale multiplication.
Key to the progress of an intensive program of growth is
the phase dedicated to reflection, in which the lessons learned
in action are articulated and incorporated into plans for the
next cycle of activity. Its principal feature is the reflection
meeting—as much a time of joyous celebration as it is of
serious consultation. Careful analysis of experience, through
participatory discussions rather than overly complex and
elaborate presentations, serves to maintain unity of vision,
sharpen clarity of thought and heighten enthusiasm. Central to
such an analysis is the review of vital statistics that suggest the
next set of goals to be adopted. Plans are made that take into
account increased capacity in terms of the human resources
available at the end of the cycle to perform various tasks, on
the one hand, and accumulated knowledge about the receptivity
of the population and the dynamics of teaching, on the other.
When human resources increase in a manner proportionate to
the rise in the overall Bahá’í population from cycle to cycle, it
is possible not only to sustain but to accelerate growth.
To meet the ambitious goal of establishing 1,500 such
intensive programs, the Bahá’í world will have to draw fully
13

1.26

1.27

1.28

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

1.29

1.30

upon the experience gained and capacity built over the past
ten years. Following your departure from the Holy Land, you
will need to enter into thorough consultation with National
Spiritual Assemblies and Regional Councils and together carefully assess conditions in each national community in order to
identify the clusters that will receive focused attention and to
map out strategic plans.
Implementation of these plans should begin as soon as poss­
ible after Rid.ván 2006. Experience in advancing the movement
of clusters from one stage to the next is now so widespread
that the methods and instruments are well understood. The
institute process must be strengthened so that a sizable number
of friends proceed through the main sequence of courses.
Intensive institute campaigns that pay adequate attention to the
practice component will be essential in this respect. The number
of core activities should be steadily multiplied, and outreach
to the wider community systematically extended. Meetings of
reflection will have to be held periodically in order to monitor
progress, maintain unity of thought and mobilize the energies of
the friends. And schemes for administering the growth process
should gradually be put in place, as circumstances demand.
While capacity at the level of the cluster to sustain growth will
remain the most compelling concern in the coming years, the
ongoing development of regional and national structures to
facilitate the flow of information and resources to and from the
field of action cannot be neglected.
Equally important will be the support lent to a cluster
through an influx of pioneers. The desire to pioneer arises naturally from deep within the heart of the individual believer as
a response to the Divine summons. Whosoever forsakes his or
her home for the purpose of teaching the Cause joins the ranks
of those noble souls whose achievements down the decades
have illumined the annals of Bahá’í pioneering. We cherish the
hope that many will be moved to render this meritorious service
during the next Plan, whether on the home front or in the international field—an act that, in itself, attracts untold blessings.
The institutions, in turn, will have to exercise sound judgment
to ensure that such friends are strategically placed. Priority
should be given to settling short-term and long-term pioneers in
those clusters that are the focus of systematic attention, whether
as a means of reinforcing endeavors to lay the groundwork for
accelerated growth or stabilizing cycles of activity under way.
14

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

It is not unreasonable to assume that a concerted effort to build
on strength will result in the eventual outflow of pioneers from
such clusters to areas destined to become the theatre of future
conquests.
Dear Friends: In the weeks and months ahead and over the
course of the Plan, you and your auxiliaries will be a constant
source of encouragement to the believers as they rise to the
challenge being presented to them. We ask that you take every
opportunity to convey to them our confidence in their capacity
to overcome the obstacles that will inevitably appear in their
path. They should not fail to recognize the scope of what they
have achieved through the sustaining grace of Bahá’u’lláh over
the past decade. In the course of the first four years, they created the institutional capacity throughout the planet to impart
spiritual education to growing contingents of believers. Building
on this accomplishment, they engaged in a rigorous process
of learning that opened before their eyes vistas of great yet
attainable possibilities. That the Bahá’í world has succeeded in
multiplying the number of devotional meetings sixfold over the
past five years, that classes for children and junior youth have
increased more than threefold during the same period, that the
number of study circles worldwide has surpassed eleven thousand—these provide a measure of the extraordinary strength
the believers can draw upon in shouldering the responsibility
entrusted to them.
Above all, the friends need to remain ever conscious of the
magnitude of the spiritual forces that are at their disposition.
They are members of a community “whose world-embracing,
continually consolidating activities constitute the one integrating process in a world whose institutions, secular as well as
religious, are for the most part dissolving.” Of all the peoples
of the world, “they alone can recognize, amidst the welter of a
tempestuous age, the Hand of the Divine Redeemer that traces
its course and controls its destinies. They alone are aware of
the silent growth of that orderly world polity whose fabric
they themselves are weaving.” It is their institutions that “will
come to be regarded as the hallmark and glory of the age” they
have been called upon to establish. The “building process,”
to which they are consecrated, is “the one hope of a stricken
society.” For, it is “actuated by the generating influence of God’s
changeless Purpose, and is evolving within the framework
of the Administrative Order of His Faith.” And remind them
15

1.31

1.32

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

that they are the illumined souls envisioned by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in
His prayer: “Heroes are they, O my Lord, lead them to the field
of battle. Guides are they, make them to speak out with arguments and proofs. Ministering servants are they, cause them to
pass round the cup that brimmeth with the wine of certitude. O
my God, make them to be songsters that carol in fair gardens,
make them lions that couch in the thickets, whales that plunge
in the vasty deep.”
The Universal House of Justice

16

2
28 December 2005
To all National Spiritual Assemblies
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
In the coming weeks you will be engaged in consultations
on the features of the next Five Year Plan as described in our
message dated 27 December 2005 to the Conference of the
Continental Boards of Counsellors. We feel that these deliberations will benefit from the following comments regarding the
curriculum of the training institute.
When in our message dated 26 December 1995 we underscored the need for a formal program of training, we were
aware that certain elements of a curriculum meeting the necessary requirements existed in the materials of the Ruhi Institute.
It was our conviction, however, that the accumulated experience at that point did not justify our recommending a specific
set of materials to be used by training institutes throughout the
world. Therefore, the messages written by us and on our behalf
in the early part of the Four Year Plan encouraged National
Spiritual Assemblies and the Counsellors to open the way for
training institutes to follow whatever curriculum they deemed
appropriate. Yet, conscious of the inherent difficulty in creating
comprehensive programs, we repeatedly expressed the view that
the execution of plans should not await protracted decisions on
the question of curriculum and that materials readily available
should be used. The availability of such materials was limited
worldwide, and National Spiritual Assemblies and institute
boards began to adopt the books of the Ruhi Institute as
they became aware of them, often through the Counsellors.
By the time the Four Year Plan came to a close, it was all too
apparent that national communities which had vigorously set
out to implement the sequence of courses designed by the Ruhi
Institute were far ahead of those who had attempted to develop
their own program.
17

2.1

2.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
2.3

2.4

2.5

It was the Five Year Plan, however, that served to convince
Counsellors, National Assemblies and boards everywhere of the
merits of the Ruhi Institute curriculum. The introduction of the
seventh book in the Institute’s main sequence at the start of the
Plan enabled many to appreciate more the intimate connection
between the flow of individuals through a sequence of courses
and the movement of clusters from one stage of growth to the
next. Indeed, as progress was achieved in hundreds of clusters,
it became clear to institutions at all levels that the content and
order of the main sequence prepared the friends to carry out
those acts of service required by the pattern of growth being
established in a cluster. We have, in fact, described the dynamics
of this relationship in our message of 27 December 2005.
We have now familiarized ourselves with the Ruhi Institute’s
present plans for curriculum development, which increasingly
draw on experience worldwide in sustaining large-scale
expansion and consolidation. We welcome the decision of the
Institute, for example, to move the book currently occupying
the fifth position in the sequence to a set of courses branching
out from Book 3 for preparing Bahá’í children’s class teachers
and to insert in the fifth place a new book for raising up animators of junior youth groups. That the eighth book in the main
sequence, initiating a series concerned with the institutional
aspects of service to the Cause, will address the all-important
question of the Covenant is noted with equal pleasure. With
these thoughts in mind, we have reached the conclusion that the
books of the Ruhi Institute should constitute the main sequence
of courses for institutes everywhere, at least through the final
years of the first century of the Formative Age when the Bahá’í
community will be focused on advancing the process of entry
by troops within the framework for action set forth in our
27 December message.
To select one curriculum to be used by training institutes
worldwide for a certain period of time is not to ignore the
variety of needs and interests of the friends as they endeavor to
better equip themselves to understand and apply the teachings
of Bahá’u’lláh. Nor does it in any way diminish the value of
the efforts made to develop courses and materials to respond
to these needs. It is not intended to suggest, either, that one
curriculum should necessarily appeal to everyone. What this
decision does imply, however, is that the present demands of
the growth of the Faith are such that, for some years to come,
18

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

training institutes should not attempt to meet all of the needs
and interests of the friends.
The institutions of the Faith will continue to respect the
wishes of those who, for whatever reason, do not feel inclined
to participate in the study of the books of the Ruhi Institute.
Those not so disposed should recognize that there are many
avenues of service open to them, including, above all, individual
teaching which is the paramount duty of every Bahá’í. Local
deepening classes and summer and winter schools, which
remain an important feature of Bahá’í community life, will
provide ample opportunities for them to deepen their know­
ledge of the teachings. What we ask of such friends, as we have
in the past, is that they not allow their personal preferences to
hamper in any way the unfoldment of an educational process
that has shown the potential to embrace millions of souls from
divers backgrounds. Regarding the materials that have been
developed in other contexts over the years, and which will
continue to emerge, these surely have their proper place in the
Bahá’í community. Some, for example, form the basis for deepening classes at the grass roots, while others, with the necessary
modifications, can be situated along one of the branches of
courses stemming out from the Ruhi Institute’s main sequence.
In this connection, we feel that the subject of branch courses deserves a few words of explanation. In our message dated
9 January 2001 to the Conference of the Continental Boards
of Counsellors, we indicated that the main sequence could be
likened to the trunk of a tree, which supports other courses
branching out from it, each branch addressing some specific area of action. A set of health materials being developed in Africa
offers a good illustration of a few features of such courses.
Following years of training community health workers in the
late 1980s and early 1990s, several Bahá’í agencies decided to
elaborate a series of modules aimed at preparing individuals
to deal with progressively more complex health issues at the
local level. By the time the first module began to be used in its
initial form, the institute process had gained in strength, and
it became evident that those who had studied Books 1 and 2
of the Ruhi Institute were better prepared to visit members of
their extended families and friends and speak on health-related
subjects. The design of the modules was modified so that they
could constitute a branch after Book 2, which participants
study while they continue along in the main sequence. Efforts
19

2.6

2.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

in this direction have met with definite success. This example
illustrates that branch courses are not a disconnected collection
of materials randomly placed at various points. Rather, they
must emerge out of actual experience and adhere to a certain
logic, both internally and in the context of the overall institute
program, if they are to be pedagogically sound. Further, the very
concept of a branch course suggests that it provides training for
an area of service which will interest only some of those who
are studying the books of the main sequence. We hope that the
development of such courses to address specific needs, defined
by action on the ground, will be a natural consequence of the
endeavors of burgeoning communities which are avidly striving
to translate into reality the teachings of Bahá’u’lláh and to use
training materials as a means of systematizing their experience
and sharing with increasing numbers the insights they gain.
The Universal House of Justice

20

3
31 December 2005
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
As the gathering of the Continental Counsellors in the Holy
Land draws to a close, we are moved to share with you the feelings of joy, triumph and confidence which have characterized
several days of focused deliberation on the present Five Year
Plan and on the global enterprise that will succeed it.
The Hand of the Cause of God ‘Alí-Muh.ammad Varqá
opened the conference with a stirring appeal for resolute
action, infusing the proceedings with a spirit of unwavering
determination. Stories poured forth of the inspiring activities of
the friends and the longing and responsiveness of the peoples of
the world, conveying assurances that the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh is
blossoming more abundantly in all parts of the globe. Persistent
questions of how to sustain the process of growth, of how to
achieve a balance between expansion and consolidation, that
have engaged the Bahá’í community for nearly half a century
found clear answers in the experiences shared from diverse
clusters on all continents. Accounts of obstacles surmounted,
fresh learning acquired, and creative insights discovered made it
evident that the Army of Light is prepared to advance towards
new horizons.
There can be no doubt that the Plan soon to end marks an
upturn in the fortunes of the Faith. We look to the next decade
and a half, the final years of the first century of the Formative
Age, with great expectations of what will be accomplished.
From this vantage point, the Bahá’í world can readily appreciate the significant extent to which the International Teaching
Centre provided the impetus so indispensable to blazing the
course set over these past few years and can, as well, discern
the rich possibilities that its consecrated endeavors portend for
the future.
21

3.1

3.2

3.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
3.4

Our message of 27 December addressed to the conference,
which has already been transmitted to National Spiritual
Assemblies, summarizes the learning about growth to date and
delineates the priorities for the next Plan. Careful study of the
message by all believers and institutions will be an essential
requisite for the upcoming consultations that will take place
at every level of the community upon the return home of the
Counsellors.
The Universal House of Justice

22

4
Rid.ván 2006
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
Rid.ván 2006 is a moment charged with a spirit of triumph
and anticipation. The followers of Bahá’u’lláh everywhere can
take rightful pride in the magnitude of their accomplishments
during the Five Year Plan now drawing to a close. And towards
the future they can look with a confidence that is conferred
only on those whose resolve is steeled through experience. The
entire Bahá’í world is stirred at contemplating the scope of the
five-year enterprise that lies ahead, the depth of consecration
it will demand, and the results it is destined to achieve. Our
prayers join yours as you turn in gratitude to Bahá’u’lláh for
the privilege of witnessing the unfoldment of His purpose for
humanity.
In our message of 27 December 2005 to the Counsellors
gathered in the Holy Land, transmitted on that same day to
all National Spiritual Assemblies, we delineated the features
of the Five Year Plan that will stretch from 2006 to 2011. The
friends and their institutions were urged to study the message
thoroughly, and its content is no doubt well familiar to you.
We now call upon each and every one of you to bend your
energies towards ensuring that the goal of establishing over
the next five years intensive programs of growth in no less
than 1,500 clusters worldwide is successfully met. That in the
months following the Counsellors’ departure from the World
Centre the groundwork for the Plan’s launch was laid so rapidly
and systematically in country after country is an indication of
the eagerness with which the Bahá’í community is taking up
the challenge presented to it. While there is no need for us to
elaborate further on the requirements of the Plan here, we feel
compelled to offer for your reflection a few comments on the
23

4.1

4.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

4.3

4.4

4.5

global context in which your individual and collective efforts
will be pursued.
More than seventy years ago Shoghi Effendi penned his
World Order letters in which he provided a penetrating analysis
of the forces operating in the world. With an eloquence that
was his alone, he described two great processes that have been
set in motion by Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation, one destructive and
the other integrative, both of which are propelling humanity
towards the World Order He conceived. We were cautioned
by the Guardian not to be “misled by the painful slowness
characterizing the unfoldment of the civilization” being
laboriously established or to be “deluded by the ephemeral
manifestations of returning prosperity which at times appear to
be capable of checking the disruptive influence of the chronic
ills afflicting the institutions of a decaying age.” No review of
the course of events in recent decades can fail to acknowledge
the gathering momentum of the processes he analyzed then with
such precision.
One need only consider the deepening moral crisis engulfing
humanity to appreciate the extent to which the forces of disintegration have rent the fabric of society. Have not the evidences
of selfishness, of suspicion, of fear and of fraud, which the
Guardian perceived with such clarity, become so widespread as
to be readily apparent to even the casual observer? Does not the
threat of terrorism of which he spoke loom so large on the
international scene as to preoccupy the minds of young and old
alike in every corner of the globe? Have not the unquenchable
thirst for, and the feverish pursuit after, earthly vanities, riches
and pleasures so consolidated their power and influence as to
assume authority over such human values as happiness, fidelity
and love? Have not the weakening of family solidarity and the
irresponsible attitude towards marriage reached such proportions as to endanger the existence of this fundamental unit of
society? “The perversion of human nature, the degradation
of human conduct, the corruption and dissolution of human
institutions,” about which Shoghi Effendi forewarned, are
sadly revealing themselves “in their worst and most revolting
aspects.”
The Guardian lays the greatest share of the blame for
humanity’s moral downfall on the decline of religion as a social
force. “Should the lamp of religion be obscured,” he draws our
attention to the words of Bahá’u’lláh, “chaos and confusion
24

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

will ensue, and the lights of fairness, of justice, of tranquillity
and peace cease to shine.” The decades that followed the
writing of his letters have seen not only a continued deterioration in the ability of religion to exercise moral influence, but
also the betrayal of the masses through the unseemly conduct
of religious institutions. Attempts at reinvigorating it have
only given rise to a fanaticism that, if left unchecked, could
destroy the foundation of civilized relationships among people.
The persecution of the Bahá’ís in Iran, recently intensified, is
ample evidence alone of the determination of the forces of
darkness to quench the flame of faith wherever it burns brightly.
Though confident in the ultimate triumph of the Cause, we dare
not forget the warning of the Guardian that the Faith will have
to contend with enemies more powerful and more insidious
than those who have afflicted it in the past.
There is no need to comment extensively on the impotence
of statesmanship, another theme treated so masterfully by the
Guardian in his World Order letters. The widening economic
divide between the rich and the poor, the persistence of age-old
animosities among nations, the swelling numbers of the displaced, the extraordinary rise in organized crime and violence,
the pervasive sense of insecurity, the breakdown of basic
services in so many regions, the indiscriminate exploitation
of natural resources—these are but a few of the signs of the
inability of world leaders to devise viable schemes to alleviate
humanity’s ills. This is not to say that sincere efforts have not
been exerted, in fact, have not multiplied decade after decade.
Yet these ­efforts, no matter how ingenious, fall well short of
removing “the root cause of the evil that has so rudely upset the
equilibrium of present-day society.” “Not even,” the Guardian
asserted, “would the very act of devising the machinery required
for the political and economic unification of the world …
provide in itself the antidote against the poison that is steadily
undermining the vigor of organized peoples and nations.”
“What else,” he confidently affirmed, “but the unreserved
acceptance of the Divine Program” enunciated by Bahá’u’lláh,
“embodying in its essentials God’s divinely appointed scheme
for the unification of mankind in this age, coupled with an
indomitable conviction in the unfailing efficacy of each and
all of its provisions, is eventually capable of withstanding the
forces of internal disintegration which, if unchecked, must
needs continue to eat into the vitals of a despairing society.”
25

4.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
4.7

4.8

Penetrating, indeed, is Shoghi Effendi’s depiction of the
process of disintegration accelerating in the world. Equally
striking is the accuracy with which he analyzed the forces
associated with the process of integration. He spoke of a “gradual diffusion of the spirit of world solidarity which is spontaneously arising out of the welter of a disorganized society” as
an indirect manifestation of Bahá’u’lláh’s conception of the
principle of the oneness of humankind. This spirit of solidarity
has continued to spread over the decades, and today its effect
is apparent in a range of developments, from the rejection of
deeply ingrained racial prejudices to the dawning consciousness
of world citizenship, from heightened environmental awareness
to collaborative efforts in the promotion of public health,
from the concern for human rights to the systematic pursuit
of universal education, from the establishment of interfaith
activities to the efflorescence of hundreds of thousands of local,
national and international organizations engaged in some form
of social action.
Yet for the followers of Bahá’u’lláh the most significant
developments in the process of integration are those directly
related to the Faith, many of which were nurtured by the
Guardian himself and which have advanced tremendously
since their modest beginnings. From the small nucleus of
believers to whom he imparted his first teaching plans has
grown a worldwide community with a presence in thousands of
localities, each following a well-established pattern of activity
that embodies the Faith’s principles and aspirations. Upon the
foundation of the Administrative Order he so painstakingly
laid during the early decades of his ministry has been raised
a large, closely knit network of National and Local Spiritual
Assemblies diligently administering the affairs of the Cause in
more than one hundred and eighty countries. From the first
contingents of Auxiliary Board members for the Protection and
Propagation of the Faith brought into being by him has arisen
a legion of nearly one thousand stalwart workers serving in the
field under the direction of eighty-one Counsellors ably guided
by the International Teaching Centre. The evolution of the
World Administrative Centre of the Faith, within the precincts
of its World Spiritual Centre, a process to which the Guardian
consecrated so much energy, has crossed a crucial threshold
with the occupation by the Universal House of Justice of its
Seat on Mount Carmel and the subsequent completion of the
26

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

International Teaching Centre Building and the Centre for the
Study of the Texts. The Institution of H
. uqúqu’lláh has steadily
progressed under the stewardship of the Hand of the Cause of
God Dr. ‘Alí-Muh.ammad Varqá, appointed Trustee by Shoghi
Effendi fifty years ago, culminating in the establishment in 2005
of an international board designed to promote the continued
widespread application of this mighty law, a source of inest­
imable blessings for all humanity. The efforts of the Guardian
to raise the profile of the Faith in international circles have
developed into an extensive external affairs system, capable of
both defending the interests of the Faith and proclaiming its
universal message. The respect the Faith enjoys in international
fora, whenever its representatives speak, is a most noteworthy
accomplishment. The loyalty and devotion that the members
of a community reflecting the diversity of the entire human
race evince towards the Covenant of Bahá’u’lláh constitute a
storehouse of strength the like of which no other organized
group can claim.
The Guardian foresaw that, in succeeding epochs of the
Formative Age, the Universal House of Justice would launch
a series of worldwide enterprises which would “symbolize
the unity and coordinate and unify the activities” of National
Spiritual Assemblies. Over the course of three successive epochs
now, the Bahá’í community has labored assiduously within the
framework of the global Plans issued by the House of Justice
and has succeeded in establishing a pattern of Bahá’í life that
promotes the spiritual development of the individual and channels the collective energies of its members towards the spiritual
revival of society. It has acquired the capacity to reach large
numbers of receptive souls with the message, to confirm them,
and to deepen their understanding of the essentials of the Faith
they have embraced. It has learned to translate the principle of
consultation enunciated by its Founder into an effective tool
for collective decision-making and to educate its members in
its use. It has devised programs for the spiritual and moral
education of its younger members and has extended them not
only to its own children and junior youth but also to those of
the wider community. With the pool of talent at its disposition,
it has created a rich body of literature which includes volumes
in scores of languages that address both its own needs and
the interest of the general public. It has become increasingly
involved in the affairs of society at large, undertaking a host of
27

4.9

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

4.10

4.11

projects of social and economic development. Particularly since
the opening of the fifth epoch in 2001, it has made significant
strides in multiplying its human resources through a program
of training that reaches the grass roots of the community and
has discovered methods and instruments for establishing a
sustainable pattern of growth.
It is in the context of the interplay of the forces described
here that the imperative of advancing the process of entry by
troops must be viewed. The Five Year Plan now opening requires that you concentrate your energies on this process and
ensure that the two complementary movements at its heart are
accelerated. This should be your dominant concern. As your
efforts bear fruit and the dynamics of growth reach a new level
of complexity, there will be challenges and opportunities for the
World Centre itself to address in the coming five years in fields
such as external affairs, social and economic development,
administration, and the application of Bahá’í law. The growth
of the community has already necessitated that new arrangements be put in place to double the number of pilgrims to four
hundred in each group beginning in October 2007. There are
several other projects that will also have to be pursued. Among
these are the further development of the gardens surrounding
the Shrine of Bahá’u’lláh, as well as the Rid.ván Garden
and Mazra‘ih; the restoration of the International Archives
Building; structural repairs to the Shrine of the Báb, the full
extent of which are not yet clear; and the construction of the
House of Worship in Chile as envisioned by the Guardian, the
last of the continental Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs. As these endeavors
advance, we will call on you from time to time for assistance,
both in the form of financial support and specialized talents,
mindful that the resources of the Faith should, to the greatest
measure possible, be channeled to the requirements of the Plan.
Dear friends: That the forces of disintegration are gaining
in range and power cannot be ignored. It is equally clear that
the community of the Greatest Name has been guided from
strength to strength by the Hand of Providence and must now
increase in size and augment its resources. The course set by the
Five Year Plan is straightforward. How can those of us aware of
the plight of humanity, and conscious of the direction in which
history is unfolding, not arise to the fullest of our capacity and
dedicate ourselves to its aim? Do not the words of the Guardian
that “the stage is set” hold as true for us today as they did when
28

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

he wrote them during the first Seven Year Plan? Let his words
ring in your ears: “There is no time to lose.” “There is no room
left for vacillation.” “Such an opportunity is irreplaceable.” “To
try, to persevere, is to insure ultimate and complete victory.” Be
assured of our continued prayers at the Sacred Threshold for
your guidance and protection.
The Universal House of Justice

29

5
25 March 2007
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
One of the signs of the breakdown of society in all parts of
the world is the erosion of trust and collaboration between the
individual and the institutions of governance. In many nations
the electoral process has become discredited because of endemic
corruption. Contributing to the widening distrust of so vital a
process are the influence on the outcome from vested interests
having access to lavish funds, the restrictions on freedom of
choice inherent in the party system, and the distortion in public
perception of the candidates by the bias expressed in the media.
Apathy, alienation, and disillusionment are a consequence, too,
as is a growing sense of despair of the unlikelihood that the
most capable citizens will emerge to deal with the manifold
problems of a defective social order. Evident everywhere is
a yearning for institutions which will dispense justice, dispel
oppression, and foster an enduring unity between the disparate
elements of society.
The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh is the divinely ordained system for which nations and peoples so desperately search. Hailed
by the Báb in the Persian Bayan, its foundational features prescribed by Bahá’u’lláh Himself, this Order is without precedent
in human history for its standard of justice and its commitment
to the practical realization of the oneness of mankind, as well
as for its capacity to promote change and the advancement of
world civilization. It provides the means by which the Divine
Will illumines the path of human progress and guides the
eventual establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth.
Throughout the entire planet the devoted followers
of Bahá’u’lláh are laboring to develop further the Bahá’í
Administrative Order described by the Guardian “not only
as the nucleus but the very pattern of the New World Order,”
31

5.1

5.2

5.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

5.4

5.5

5.6

thus setting the foundation for a world civilization destined to
yield its dazzling splendor in the centuries to come. They do so
notwithstanding the conditions of turmoil and disorder alluded
to by Bahá’u’lláh in affirming that “the world’s equilibrium
hath been upset through the vibrating influence of this most
great, this new World Order. Mankind’s ordered life hath been
revolutionized through the agency of this unique, this wondrous
System—the like of which mortal eyes have never witnessed.”
With the concerted worldwide endeavor to advance the
process of entry by troops gathering momentum through
implementation of the provisions of the Five Year Plan, it
is now opportune that the believers everywhere give greater
attention to strengthening the process by which Assemblies,
national and local, are elected. The manner of participation
by all adult members of the community in these elections is a
distinguishing feature of the System of Bahá’u’lláh; for it is a
bounden duty that confers a high privilege upon every Bahá’í to
select, as a responsible citizen of the new world being brought
into existence, the composition of the institutions having
authority over the functioning of the Bahá’í community. In
this regard, indifference and neglect on the part of any believer
are alien to the spirit of the Cause. The friends must strive
ceaselessly to avoid being contaminated with these destructive
attitudes, which have inflicted such damage on the integrity and
authority of the institutions of a declining world order.
In describing Bahá’í elections, Shoghi Effendi, through a
letter written on his behalf, conveyed that “Bahá’í electoral
procedures and methods have, indeed, for one of their essential
purposes the development in every believer of the spirit of
responsibility. By emphasizing the necessity of maintaining his
full freedom in the elections, they make it incumbent upon him
to become an active and well-informed member of the Bahá’í
community in which he lives.”
The manner in which the elector exercises the right and
privilege to cast his vote is therefore of great significance. Shoghi
Effendi’s instruction in this passage further explains that “to be
able to make a wise choice at the election time, it is necessary for
him to be in close and continued contact with all local activities,
be they teaching, administrative or otherwise, and to fully and
wholeheartedly participate in the affairs of the local as well as
national committees and assemblies in his country. It is only in
this way that a believer can develop a true social consciousness
32

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

and acquire a true sense of responsibility in matters affecting
the interests of the Cause. Bahá’í community life thus makes
it a duty for every loyal and faithful believer to become an
intelligent, well-informed and responsible elector, and also gives
him the opportunity of raising himself to such a station.”
While there should be no mention of personalities in connection with Bahá’í elections, it is quite appropriate for believers
to discuss the requirements and qualifications for membership
in the institution to be elected. Shoghi Effendi offers clear guidance on this point: “I feel that reference to personalities before
the election would give rise to misunderstanding and differences.
What the friends should do is to get thoroughly acquainted
with one another, to exchange views, to mix freely and discuss
among themselves the requirements and qualifications for such a
membership without reference or application, however indirect,
to particular individuals.” Among the “necessary qualities”
specified by the Guardian are those “of unquestioned loyalty,
of selfless devotion, of a well-trained mind, of recognized ability
and mature experience.” With a heightened awareness of the
functions to be performed by the elected body, the believer can
properly assess those for whom a vote should be cast. From
among the pool of those whom the elector believes to be qualified to serve, selection should be made with due consideration
given to such other factors as age distribution, diversity, and
gender. The elector should make his choice after careful thought
over an extended period before the actual election.
When called upon to vote in a Bahá’í election, believers
should be aware that they are carrying out a sacred task unique
to this Dispensation. They should approach this duty in a
prayerful attitude, seeking divine guidance and confirmation. As
Shoghi Effendi has advised, “they must turn completely to God,
and with a purity of motive, a freedom of spirit and a sanctity
of heart, participate in the elections.”
Through their wholehearted embrace of the Bahá’í electoral
process, the believers will witness, day by day, a greater contrast
between the emerging institutions of the Bahá’í Administrative
Order and the decaying social order around them. In this
increasing distinction will be seen the promise of the glory of
the World Order of Bahá’u’lláh—the System destined to fulfill
the highest expectations of humanity.
The Universal House of Justice
33

5.7

5.8

5.9

6
Rid.ván 2007
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
The first year of the Five Year Plan bears eloquent ­testimony
to the spirit of devotion with which Bahá’u’lláh’s followers have
embraced the framework for action presented in our message
of 27 December 2005 and their commitment to advancing the
process of entry by troops. Where this framework has been
applied coherently in all its dimensions in a cluster, steady
progress is being achieved, both in terms of the participation of
the believers and their friends in community life and in terms
of numerical growth, with some clusters reporting enrollments
in the hundreds every few months and others in scores. Vital
to this development has been a heightened awareness of the
spiritual nature of the enterprise, together with an increased
understanding of those decision-making instruments that are
defined by the principal features of the Plan.
Prior to our launching the current series of global Plans
focused on the single aim of advancing the process of entry by
troops, the Bahá’í community had passed through a stage of
rapid, large-scale expansion in many parts of the world—an
expansion which ultimately was impossible to sustain. The
challenge, then, lay not so much in swelling the ranks of
the Cause with new adherents, at least from populations of
proven receptivity, but in incorporating them into the life of
the community and raising up from among them adequate
numbers dedicated to its further expansion. So crucial was it
for the Bahá’í world to address this challenge that we made
it a central feature of the Four Year Plan and called upon
National Spiritual Assemblies to spend the greater part of
their energies creating institutional capacity, in the form of the
training institute, to develop human resources. Ever-increasing
contingents of believers, we indicated, would need to benefit
35

6.1

6.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

6.3

6.4

6.5

from a formal program of training designed to endow them
with the know­ledge and spiritual insights, with the skills and
abilities, required to carry out the acts of service that would
sustain large-scale expansion and consolidation.
Today as we observe the workings of those clusters which
are in a robust state of growth, we note that in every one of
them the friends have continued to strengthen the institute
process, while learning to mobilize their expanding nucleus of
active supporters of the Faith, to establish an efficient scheme
for the coordination of their efforts, to weave their individual
initiatives and collective endeavors into an effective pattern
of unified action, and to draw on the analysis of pertinent
information in planning the cycles of their activities. That
they have found the means for carrying forward the work
of expansion and consolidation hand in hand—the key to
sustained growth—is demonstrable. Such evidence will surely
inspire every devoted believer to remain resolute on the path of
systematic learning that has been set.
The accomplishments of these years of prodigious effort
have not been confined to those clusters where the work of
large-scale expansion and consolidation is being thus revitalized. The approach taken during the Four Year Plan, followed
by the Twelve Month Plan and the previous Five Year Plan,
proved instrumental in creating conditions for the believers to
extend their endeavors to a wide circle of people, engaging them
in various aspects of community life. The benefits of the decade-long process of capacity building in the three participants
of the global Plans are now broadly apparent. Everywhere there
was a need to gain an understanding of the dynamics of human
resource development. Everywhere the friends had to learn
the requirements of steady growth—to promote systematic
action and to avoid distractions, to bring certain elements of
collective decision-making close to the grass roots and to create
communities with a sense of mission, to encourage universal
participation and to accommodate different segments of society
in their activities, particularly children and junior youth, the
future champions of the Cause of God and builders of His
civilization.
With so firm a foundation in place, the foremost thought in
the mind of each and every believer should be teaching. Whether
in their personal efforts they teach their friends in firesides and
then involve them in the core activities or use these activities as
36

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

their primary instrument for teaching, whether as a community
they make their work with children and junior youth the initial
thrust in a cluster or focus first on the older generations, whether in their collective endeavors they visit families in teams as
part of an intensive campaign or call on seekers in their homes
periodically over time—these are decisions that can only be
made according to the circumstances and possibilities of the
friends and the nature of the populations with whom they interact. What all must acknowledge, irrespective of circumstance,
are both the crying need of a humanity that, bereft of spiritual
sustenance, is sinking deeper into despair and the urgency of the
responsibility to teach with which we each have been entrusted
as members of the community of the Greatest Name.
Bahá’u’lláh has commanded His followers to teach the
Cause. Already thousands upon thousands are energetically
applying the provisions of the Plan to open up avenues for
them to guide souls to the Ocean of His Revelation. We look
with expectant eyes to the day when teaching is the dominating
passion in the life of every believer and when the unity of the
community is so strong as to enable this state of enkindlement
to express itself in unremitting action in the field of service.
This, then, is our ardent hope for you and the object of our
most fervent prayers at the Sacred Threshold.
The Universal House of Justice

37

6.6

7
9 September 2007
To the Bahá’í students deprived of access
to higher education in Iran
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
In these difficult days laden with tribulation, we are with
you in spirit, our hearts heavy at the injustice that continues to
rain upon you. The persistent position of the Iranian authorities
in banning Bahá’í students from access to higher education is
deeply saddening. The policy was clearly confirmed in a recently
disclosed communication by the Central Security Office of the
Ministry of Science, Research, and Technology, confidentially
conveyed to the officials of eighty-one universities in Iran,
which called for the expulsion of any student discovered to be
a Bahá’í. It has now been reaffirmed by the action taken recently by the Education Evaluation Organization, which declared as
“incomplete”—and therefore invalid—the applications of some
800 Bahá’ís who took the national exam for university entrance
for the coming academic year (2007–2008). These official acts
are disappointing and shameful.
Only a few months ago, reports carried by newspapers
about the expulsion of Bahá’í students in Iran were denied by a
spokesperson for Iran’s mission to the United Nations, who said
outright that no one in Iran is expelled from university because
of religion. That same assurance was given by the embassy of
the Islamic Republic of Iran in the United Kingdom, in a written
response to the concern a British Member of Parliament had
expressed about the government’s treatment of Bahá’í students.
A similar avowal by the Iranian embassy in Ethiopia appeared
in a newspaper in that country following the publication of
a story reporting Iran’s covert plan to identify Bahá’ís and
secretly monitor their activities throughout the country.
For more than two decades Bahá’í students in Iran were
unable to enter university because the only way open to them
39

7.1

7.2

7.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

7.4

7.5

would have been to misrepresent their Faith. Then, consequent
to a concerted worldwide effort—involving governments,
educational institutions, nongovernmental organizations, and
individuals—that raised questions about this situation, your
government’s representatives responded by averring that the
reference to religion on the forms was not to identify university
applicants by belief but only to specify the religion on which
they wished to be examined.
That you would have received such explanations with a
degree of skepticism is understandable. However, as a gesture
of goodwill and to find a solution to an issue that adversely
affects the good name of Iran, the Bahá’í community accepted
this apparent clarification. At long last, you were able to feel
hopeful that the way would now be clear for you to continue
your education. Thus, some of you sat for the 2006–2007
entrance examination and were able to register at university.
Your hopes were, however, short-lived, as over the course of
this academic year more than half of those who had been
enrolled were expelled, and we now have the Ministry’s letter
which confirms that for no other reason than your adherence
to the Bahá’í Faith you will not be permitted to continue your
education at institutions of higher learning in your country.
Recent events call to mind heartrending episodes in the
history of the Faith, of cruel deceptions wrought against your
forebears. It is only appropriate that you strive to transcend the
opposition against you with that same constructive resilience
that characterized their response to the duplicity of their detractors. Peering beyond the distress of the difficulties assailing
them, those heroic souls attempted to translate the Teachings
of the new Faith into actions of spiritual and social development. This, too, is your work. Their objective was to build, to
strengthen, to refine the tissues of society wherever they might
find themselves; and thus, they set up schools, equally educating
girls and boys; introduced progressive principles; promoted
the sciences; contributed significantly to diverse fields such as
agriculture, health, and industry—all of which accrued to the
benefit of the nation. You, too, seek to render service to your
homeland and to contribute to a renewal of civilization. They
responded to the inhumanity of their enemies with patience,
calm, resignation, and contentment, choosing to meet deception
with truthfulness and cruelty with goodwill towards all. You,
too, demonstrate such noble qualities and, holding fast to these
40

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

same principles, you belie the slander purveyed against your
Faith, evoking the admiration of the fair-minded.
This action of the government in obstructing youth,
Bahá’í or otherwise, from access to higher education stands in
contrast to the noble history of Iran’s past attainments. How
is it to be explained to the people of the world, especially the
youth, when such doings can be perpetrated in a nation that
claims adherence to Islamic principles? What then of the value
of education as upheld in past centuries by these principles,
which stimulated the establishment of renowned centers of
learning and produced in your nation brilliant minds that, in
advancing knowledge, made enduring contributions to the arts
and sciences? What must be the repercussions for the nation
when thoughtful people and eminent institutions abroad, in
utter dismay, find it inconceivable that a Ministry charged with
promoting learning would issue such directives as would deny
citizens of its own country access to education? What can poss­
ibly be said by the officials responsible as to the moral grounds
for such decisions? Can it reasonably be assumed that they
have any regard for international commitments Iran has made
to justice and fair-mindedness or, indeed, bear any awareness
of the fear of God?
The sufferings you bear, the sacrifices you ceaselessly make,
however grievous the circumstances, are only a part of the horrors agonizing millions upon millions in Iran and throughout
the world in these times of global ferment. Such acknowledgement does not diminish in the least your adversity, but it is
essential that you grasp its context. Bahá’u’lláh remarked often
on the dire state of the world. “The winds of despair are, alas,
blowing from every direction, and the strife that divides and
afflicts the human race is daily increasing,” He wrote. “The
world is in great turmoil and the minds of its people are in a
state of utter confusion.”
In response to their agonies, some feel impelled to rise
against their oppressors, some can only flee for refuge, some
capitulate to their fate. But while most of the afflicted peoples
of the world are often the victims of random forces of oppress­
ion, prejudice, or injustice, you know clearly why you suffer,
and your response must be equally clear. Consider some of
the exhortations of Bahá’u’lláh and of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá: “Do not
busy yourselves in your own concerns; let your thoughts be
fixed upon that which will rehabilitate the fortunes of mankind
41

7.6

7.7

7.8

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

7.9

7.10

7.11

and sanctify the hearts and souls of men.” “Pay ye no heed to
aversion and rejection, to disdain, hostility, injustice: act ye
in the opposite way.” “If others ... poison your lives, sweeten
their souls ...” “Should any one of you enter a city, he should
become a center of attraction by reason of his sincerity, his
faithfulness and love, his honesty and fidelity, his truthfulness
and loving-kindness towards all the peoples of the world….”
“Be ye the helpers of every victim of oppression, the patrons
of the disadvantaged.” “Let him do some good to every person
whose path he crosseth, and be of some benefit to him.” “...
undertake in all sincerity and purity of intent and for the sake
of God alone, to counsel and exhort the masses and clarify their
vision with that collyrium which is knowledge.”
Did Bahá’u’lláh Himself not endure hardship to promulgate
His Teachings? Did He not consent “to be bound with chains
that mankind may be released from its bondage”?
With an illumined conscience, with a world-embracing
vision, with no partisan political agenda, and with due regard
for law and order, strive for the regeneration of your country.
By your deeds and services, attract the hearts of those around
you, even win the esteem of your avowed enemies, so that you
may vindicate the innocence of, and gain ever-increasing respect
and acceptance for, your community in the land of its birth.
Think not that these are mere words meant to soothe your
disappointed hearts. Think rather of the situation which has
developed as a result of the disciplined reaction to the torment
borne by Iranian Bahá’ís since 1979. Has the manner of their
response to oppression thus far not elicited the warm admir­
ation of increasing numbers of their compatriots? To defend
yourselves is, of course, only fair, and every principled means
is being taken to defend you against oppression. Is there not
an active defense mounted on your behalf by governments and
nongovernmental organizations, at national and international
levels, and well-respected institutions of higher learning everywhere? Obviously, you are not alone. But your perseverance
must be accompanied by patience; indeed, the patience required
in the usually slow processes of social evolution is painful.
Opposition to a newly revealed truth is a common matter
of human history; it repeats itself in every age. But of equal
historical consistency is the fact that nothing can prevail against
an idea whose time has come. The time has arrived for freedom
of belief, for harmony between science and religion, faith and
42

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

reason, for the advancement of women, for freedom from
prejudice of every kind, for mutual respect between diverse
peoples and nations, indeed, for the unity of the entire human
race. The deepest yearnings of the Iranian people resonate with
implications of the world-revolutionizing principles enunciated
by Bahá’u’lláh.
Service to others is the way. Let it be your watchword,
‘Abdu’l-Bahá being your exemplar. Like Him, you can find
practical ways of serving your fellow citizens. Strive to work
hand in hand, shoulder to shoulder, with your fellow citizens in
your efforts to promote the common good.
This surely is a time for the gallantry of illumined souls.
Very dear friends, we pray that you can be counted among this
noble company.
The Universal House of Justice

43

7.12

7.13

8
26 November 2007
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
We are moved on the occasion of this Day of the Covenant
to reflect on the august Institution of the Hands of the Cause
of God in the aftermath of the decease only two months ago
of the last remaining Hand of the Cause, Dr. ‘Alí-Muh.ammad
Varqá. It was just a few weeks before the fiftieth anniversary
of the passing of Shoghi Effendi that our world community
suffered this grievous loss. How sobering, indeed, it is to realize
that Dr. Varqá’s departure brought to an end the remarkable
stewardship of an institution whose legacy is unparalleled in
religious history! At so significant a juncture in the Formative
Age of the Faith, it is only fitting that an effort be made to
understand more deeply than before the significance of the
achievements of so outstanding an organ of the Administrative
Order—one that proved to be so integral to the evolution of
our world community during its nascent years.
We trace the origins of the Institution to Bahá’u’lláh
Himself, Who designated four renowned promoters of His
teachings as Hands of the Cause of God. In a period before
the administrative system of the Faith was inaugurated, they
became rallying points for the friends, as much because of the
virtuous character of their personal lives as for their unceasing
endeavors in proclaiming the Teachings and defending the Faith
against its detractors. They remained resolute in such activities
despite the severe persecution, including imprisonment in some
instances, to which they were subjected by the authorities.
These distinguished personages remained active during the
ministry of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Who, in 1899, instructed them to take
steps to form the Local Spiritual Assembly of T.ihrán, on which
they all served. The focus of these first Hands on propagation
and protection of the Faith, as well as their efforts to edify
45

8.1

8.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

8.3

8.4

believers as to the importance of the new Laws, intimated even
then the pattern of functioning the Institution would adopt at a
later stage in the advancement of the Bahá’í community.
The Master did not Himself appoint Hands of the Cause,
but referred to four believers posthumously as such. However,
His Will and Testament confirmed the Institution and extended
it by authorizing the Guardian of the Faith to appoint consecrated souls to it. At first, over a period of three decades,
Shoghi Effendi named ten such souls posthumously; all were
distinguished for the constancy, vigor and impact of their
efforts to propagate the Cause and promote its best interests.
The Guardian’s designation in December 1951 of twelve living
believers as Hands of the Cause introduced the Bahá’í world
to a wholly new dynamic in the operation of the Order of
Bahá’u’lláh; through it the Hands exerted an unusual vitality
during the Ten Year Crusade, particularly after the sudden
passing of the Sign of God. His subsequent appointment of
seven more in February 1952 and replacement thereafter of five
of those deceased kept the number of living Hands at nineteen
until less than a month before his departure, when in his last
message to the Bahá’í world he identified an additional eight,
bringing the total to twenty-seven. Shoghi Effendi’s description
of them as the “Chief Stewards of Bahá’u’lláh’s embryonic
World Commonwealth” prefigured the world-shaking reality of
the unexpected responsibilities that would be thrust upon them
on the morrow of his passing.
The Guardian now forever gone, the Hands’ first task,
despite the sorrow that overwhelmed them, was to restore the
composure of a grief-stricken community. A vital aspect of that
task was, of course, to settle the minds of the friends about
the direction that the Faith would take. The Hands acted with
dispatch. Only sixteen days after the burial of the Guardian,
they issued from the Holy Land a proclamation to the Bahá’ís
of East and West. Declaring that, after a thorough search, no
will or instruction of Shoghi Effendi had been found, they
set forth in this message the procedures they would follow in
meeting the daunting challenge they faced. It announced that a
body of nine Hands, designated “Custodians,” was constituted
to function at the Bahá’í World Centre to protect the Faith,
maintain communications with National Spiritual Assemblies
in connection with the prosecution of the Ten Year Plan and on
administrative matters, and attend to all issues related to the
46

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

preservation of the World Centre of the Faith. The friends everywhere derived from this first communication assurance that
the ship of the Cause would safely traverse the waters severely
troubled by the Guardian’s passing. Subsequent messages issued
from conclaves of the Hands held in the Holy Land further
infused confidence in the believers who arose to meet the goals
set before them in the Plan.
The Hands residing outside the Holy Land, in addition to
giving close attention to the progress of the Plan in their own
regions, undertook extensive journeys to visit and encourage
the believers in every clime. Their travels covered the entire
surface of the planet as they pursued every opportunity to
advance the work of the Plan left by Shoghi Effendi. The obligations of the Hands spelled out in the Will and Testament of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá were carried out with the selflessness, fearlessness
and zeal characteristic of their activity. To “diffuse the Divine
Fragrances, to edify the souls of men, to promote learning, to
improve the character of all men”—all these they undertook
with outstanding, sometimes astonishing, results. Such travels
did not cease with the conclusion of the Ten Year Plan but
continued with unabated intensity, the legendary journeys of
Amatu’l-Bahá Rúh.íyyih Khánum generating immeasurable
stimulus. Thus the activities of the Hands demonstrated to a
superlative degree the efficacy of Bahá’u’lláh’s assertion that
the “movement itself from place to place, when undertaken for
the sake of God, hath always exerted, and can now exert, its
influence in the world.”
Among the principal results of their combined labors,
these stand out: maintenance of the stature of the Faith as an
independent and indivisible Order; protection of the Cause
against schism, despite the disloyalty to the Covenant of one
among their exalted company, Mason Remey, whom they were
obliged to cast out; preservation of the properties and maintenance of the Holy Places and gardens at the World Centre;
success in the vast expansion of the Faith. All these hard-won
accomplishments prepared the path to the smooth transition
that the Hands effected from the ministry of Shoghi Effendi,
as head of the Faith, to that of the Universal House of Justice,
for whose first election they meticulously prepared the Bahá’í
world, especially the fifty-six National Spiritual Assemblies
that participated in it. The Hands of the Cause delivered to the
House of Justice a community that was so greatly transformed
47

8.5

8.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

8.7

8.8

8.9

during the Ten Year Plan as to place the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh
on the map as a world religion in every legitimate sense. The
grand celebration at the World Congress in London attended
by Bahá’ís from countries of every continent demonstrated the
validity of that claim.
Beyond the World Crusade, the Hands of the Cause threw
the full weight of their support behind the newly formed
Universal House of Justice, whose creation their valiant
efforts ensured. They undertook many missions on its behalf
and pursued tasks befitting their continuing obligation to propagate and protect the Faith. As in the absence of the Guardian
there was no way further to appoint Hands of the Cause, the
Hands in the Holy Land in particular performed what may well
be viewed as a distinct and final mark of service: they assisted
the House of Justice to extend into the future the functions of
propagation and protection in the special character of their
institution. Hence, in 1968 Continental Boards of Counsellors
were raised up and then in 1973 was created the International
Teaching Centre foreshadowed in the writings of Shoghi
Effendi. In their tireless support of the House of Justice in the
design of these institutions and in the guidance they lent to
their development, the Hands left to the Bahá’í world a further
legacy that only future generations will be able adequately to
appreciate. A shining value of their ultimate exertions is evident
in the stature to which the International Teaching Centre has
risen in such a short time and the permeating influence of the
institution of the Counsellors which reaches every nook and
cranny of our worldwide community.
It is highly worthy of note that the body of the Hands,
with one exception, remained unbeguiled by the allurements
of power that commonly corrupt those who are suddenly
thrust by force of circumstances into positions of elevated rank
and authority. In this instance, all of creation cannot but bear
witness to the integrity of their stewardship, the unblemished
virtue of their faithfulness to principle.
A point to ponder as well is the survival to the last of the
one who was simultaneously appointed in 1955 to the two
offices of Hand of the Cause and Trustee of H
. uqúqu’lláh. That
he was able to shape the latter institution and finally to see to
its administrative transition in the formation in 2005 of the
International Board of Trustees of H
. uqúqu’lláh, with branches
spread throughout the globe, is yet another sign of the constan48

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

cy and abundance of the providential confirmations which have
attended the evolution of the Administrative Order. Clearly,
then, the work of the divinely ordained Institution of the Hands
of the Cause of God was indispensable to the progress of the
Faith from the Heroic Age to an early period of the Formative
Age; its effects are certain to endure as an integral part of the
Order of Bahá’u’lláh. The passing of Dr. Varqá marks both the
end of a chapter of Bahá’í history and the beginning of a new
stage in the unfolding of that Order.
With such thoughts astir in our minds, we recognize with
increasing wonder and appreciation the magnitude of the
contributions of the Hands of the Cause of God to the growth
and consolidation of the Faith in all parts of the world. In our
grateful hearts we recite with deep emotion the benediction so
eloquently exclaimed by the Lord of Hosts: “Light and glory,
greeting and praise be upon the Hands of His Cause, through
whom the light of fortitude hath shone forth and the truth hath
been established that the authority to choose rests with God,
the Powerful, the Mighty, the Unconstrained, through whom
the ocean of bounty hath surged and the fragrance of the gracious favors of God, the Lord of mankind, hath been diffused.”
The Universal House of Justice

49

8.10

9
18 February 2008
The Friends in Iran
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
We have received a letter from a believer in Iran with
questions about the Guardianship and the Universal House of
Justice. We appreciate that firmness in the Covenant is among
the distinctive characteristics of the believers in that land, who
are informed of the principles and essential facts pertaining to
the succession of authority in the Cause. Nevertheless, none
among them should hesitate to seek clarification of matters
about which they have questions, for the enemies of the Faith
are tireless in their attempts to sow seeds of confusion and
doubt. Moreover, it is beneficial, in view of the beloved Master’s
exhortations to us all to be ever-vigilant concerning matters of
protection, for the friends to review the relevant essentials from
time to time. We have therefore decided to provide you with the
following comments.…
Questions concerning the Guardianship and the Universal
House of Justice can be resolved through careful study of the
writings of Bahá’u’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi and
the elucidations of the House of Justice, which, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
states, will “deliberate upon all problems which have caused
difference, questions that are obscure and matters that are not
expressly recorded in the Book. Whatsoever they decide,” He
assures the friends, “has the same effect as the Text itself.”
Prior to the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in 1921, the provisions
He had put in place in His Will and Testament to safeguard
the Faith and ensure its steady advancement into the future
were generally unknown. The believers anticipated a day when
the Universal House of Justice would be established since it
had been specifically mentioned in the Sacred Texts. There
was, however, no definite understanding that there would be
a Guardian. Indeed, Shoghi Effendi later indicated that he had
51

9.1

9.2

9.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

9.4

9.5

no foreknowledge of the position to which he would be called.
At most, he had reportedly thought the Will and Testament
might charge him, as the eldest grandson of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, with
responsibility for arranging for the election of the House of
Justice. Only after the reading of the Will did the institution
of the Guardianship become widely known, and the Bahá’í
community worldwide acknowledged Shoghi Effendi as the
Head of the Faith to whom all must turn.
An attentive reading of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s Will makes it clear
that He did not indicate a predestined outcome but did provide
for a number of circumstances which, depending on future conditions, might eventually confront the Faith. The second section
of the Will, for instance, which refers only to the Universal
House of Justice, with no mention of the Guardianship, was
written at a time when His own life was in imminent danger
and Shoghi Effendi was but a small boy. During that same
period, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá had made arrangements for the election of
the Universal House of Justice to take place immediately, should
the threat on His life materialize. Through the grace of God, the
crisis passed, and it was ultimately left to Shoghi Effendi many
years later, as Guardian and Head of the Faith, to determine
the timing of the formation of the House of Justice. Early on he
considered the possibility of holding the election soon after the
passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, in which case the House of Justice and
the Guardian would have functioned simultaneously. He determined, of course, that the foundations of the Administrative
Order needed first to be firmly laid at the local and national
levels, and it eventually transpired that the House of Justice
was established several years after his own passing. That the
transition from the ministry of the Guardian to the election of
the Universal House of Justice occurred with such relative ease
can, itself, be attributed to the way certain provisions in the
Will were formulated.
‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s Will and Testament clearly allows for the
possibility of a successor to Shoghi Effendi, and in this light, we
find statements written by him or on his behalf over the course
of his thirty-six-year ministry that envision future Guardians.
However, there are no assurances in the Writings that the line of
Guardians would continue throughout the Dispensation; rather,
the possibility is envisaged that such a line would come to an
end. In this respect, Bahá’u’lláh states in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas:

52

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Endowments dedicated to charity revert to God, the
Revealer of Signs. None hath the right to dispose of them
without leave from Him Who is the Dawning-place of
Revelation. After Him, this authority shall pass to the
Aghs.án, and after them to the House of Justice—should
it be established in the world by then—that they may
use these endowments for the benefit of the Places which
have been exalted in this Cause, and for whatsoever hath
been enjoined upon them by Him Who is the God of might
and power. Otherwise, the endowments shall revert to the
people of Bahá who speak not except by His leave and
judge not save in accordance with what God hath decreed
in this Tablet—lo, they are the champions of victory
betwixt heaven and earth—that they may use them in the
manner that hath been laid down in the Book by God, the
Mighty, the Bountiful.

9.6

The passing of Shoghi Effendi precipitated the situation
described, in which the authority vested in the Aghs.án—first
in ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and then in Shoghi Effendi—ended before the
House of Justice was established.
In His Will and Testament, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá specifies in the
clearest terms the conditions according to which Shoghi Effendi
was to have named his successor as Guardian:

9.7

9.8

O ye beloved of the Lord! It is incumbent upon the
guardian of the Cause of God to appoint in his own lifetime him that shall become his successor, that differences
may not arise after his passing. He that is appointed must
manifest in himself detachment from all worldly things,
must be the essence of purity, must show in himself the fear
of God, knowledge, wisdom and learning. Thus, should the
first-born of the guardian of the Cause of God not manifest
in himself the truth of the words:—“The child is the secret
essence of its sire,” that is, should he not inherit of the
spiritual within him (the guardian of the Cause of God) and
his glorious lineage not be matched with a goodly character,
then must he, (the guardian of the Cause of God) choose
another branch to succeed him.

9.9

The Hands of the Cause of God must elect from their
own number nine persons that shall at all times be occupied
in the important services in the work of the guardian of the
Cause of God. The election of these nine must be carried

9.10

53

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

either unanimously or by majority from the company
of the Hands of the Cause of God and these, whether
unanimously or by a majority vote, must give their assent
to the choice of the one whom the guardian of the Cause of
God hath chosen as his successor. This assent must be given
in such wise as the assenting and dissenting voices may not
be distinguished (i.e., secret ballot).
9.11

9.12

The personal views of any individual regarding the above
statement, no matter how learned, cannot compare with the
Guardian’s infallible understanding of the passage. Shoghi
Effendi, who faithfully adhered to the wishes of Bahá’u’lláh
and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá throughout his ministry, would never have
been careless in a matter so essential to the integrity of the Faith
as the question of the appointment of his successor. It is unthinkable that he would appoint someone to succeed him who
did not possess the qualifications laid down by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
in His Will. It is equally untenable to suggest that he would do
so in a manner which deviated from the explicit requirements
in that same document, which included the affirmation of his
choice by nine designated Hands of the Cause of God, so that
“differences” would “not arise after his passing.” How perverse
the suggestion of the violators of the Covenant that Shoghi
Effendi would ignore the Master’s instructions and make a
veiled and indirect appointment of his successor! Rather should
the fact that Shoghi Effendi did not name a successor be seen
as a sign of his meticulous adherence to every word of ‘Abdu’lBahá’s Will and an indication of his conclusion that there was
no qualified individual whom he could appoint.
Therefore, it should be clear to every steadfast follower
of Bahá’u’lláh that the end of the line of Guardians was not
the result of any decision or action taken by the Hands of the
Cause of God following the sudden passing of Shoghi Effendi.
The line was brought to a close when, compelled by existing circumstances and the strict provisions of the Will, Shoghi Effendi
did not name a successor. To entertain the possibility that it
may one day be reestablished is futile. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá wrote that
“ere the expiration of a thousand years, no one has the right to
utter a single word, even to claim the station of Guardianship.”
And in the same passage He exhorted the friends, “Should
there be differences of opinion, the Supreme House of Justice
would immediately resolve the problems.” The Universal House
of Justice, soon after its formation, stated that it “finds that
54

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

there is no way to appoint or to legislate to make it possible to
appoint a second Guardian to succeed Shoghi Effendi.”
While the line of Guardians has ended, the Covenant is
preserved. The vast body of interpretations of Shoghi Effendi
informs the decisions of the Universal House of Justice as the
Faith continues its onward march. The unity of the Faith is safeguarded, and the realization of Bahá’u’lláh’s great purpose for
humanity assured. “The Hand of Omnipotence hath established
His Revelation upon an unassailable, an enduring foundation,”
Bahá’u’lláh has stated. “Storms of human strife are powerless
to undermine its basis, nor will men’s fanciful theories succeed
in damaging its structure.”

9.13

***
With reference to the specific questions raised in the letter
we have received, one concerns the meaning of the designation
“Aghs.án,” as found in the Writings. While in some cases, as
affirmed by the Guardian, the term applies specifically to
Bahá’u’lláh’s sons, at other times it is used more broadly to
include His male descendants. For example, in His Will and
Testament ‘Abdu’l-Bahá refers to Shoghi Effendi as “the chosen
branch” (Ghus.n-i-Mumtáz). The reference to Shoghi Effendi as
Ghus.n here—the singular form of Aghs.án—follows the usage
of Bahá’u’lláh in relation to the titles He gave His sons, that
is, the Most Great Branch, the Greater Branch, and the Purest
Branch. A letter written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi explains
that the word Aghs.án “refers to Bahá’u’lláh’s descendants”;
another describes Hussein Rabbani, the Guardian’s brother, as
“the grandchild of the Master, an Afnán and Aghs.án mentioned
in the Will and Testament of the Master.” It is evident, then, that
the designation Aghs.án, or Ghus.n, includes Shoghi Effendi and
the other male descendants of Bahá’u’lláh.
If, at any time, male descendants of Bahá’u’lláh appear
who are faithful to the Covenant, it would nevertheless not
be possible for any of them to occupy the office of Guardian,
for, as already explained, in the absence of appointment by
Shoghi Effendi, they cannot claim the station of Guardianship
and there is no way for one to be named to it by an act of the
House of Justice.
***

55

9.14

9.15

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
9.16

9.17

9.18

9.19

9.20

9.21

Another query concerns the establishment of the
Universal House of Justice. Specifically, the question has been
asked whether the functioning of an “officially recognized”
International Bahá’í Court in the Holy Land, mentioned by
Shoghi Effendi, was an essential preliminary step in the evolution of the Universal House of Justice.
As you are no doubt aware, Shoghi Effendi explained
that “‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Himself, in one of His earliest Tablets,
contemplated the possibility of the formation of the Universal
House of Justice in His own lifetime.” The Master described the
requirements necessary for its formation, which did not include
the establishment of a religious court:
The Supreme House of Justice should be elected according to the system followed in the election of the parliaments
of Europe. And when the countries would be guided the
Houses of Justice of the various countries would elect the
Supreme House of Justice.
At whatever time all the beloved of God in each
country appoint their delegates, and these in turn elect their
representatives, and these representatives elect a body, that
body shall be regarded as the Supreme House of Justice.
The establishment of that House is not dependent upon
the conversion of all the nations of the world. For example,
if conditions were favorable and no disturbances would
be caused, the friends in Persia would elect their representatives, and likewise the friends in America, in India, and
other areas would also elect their representatives, and these
would elect a House of Justice. That House of Justice would
be the Supreme House of Justice. That is all.
Over the thirty-six years of his ministry, as he guided
the Bahá’í world, striving to lay the foundations of the
Administrative Order, Shoghi Effendi outlined specific developmental steps to be taken, which were intended to lead to the
eventual establishment of the Universal House of Justice. The
accomplishment of some depended largely on the exertions of
the believers themselves—an increase in the number of Local
and National Spiritual Assemblies, the appointment of the
International Bahá’í Council and its evolution into an elected
body. Others, however, were subject to the forces operating
in society and, no matter what the efforts made by the Bahá’í
community, could not be accomplished.
56

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

In 1929, for instance, the Guardian stated, “given favorable
circumstances, under which the Bahá’ís of Persia and of the
adjoining countries under Soviet rule may be enabled to elect
their national representatives … the only remaining obstacle in
the way of the definite formation of the International House of
Justice will have been removed.” Later, following the expulsion
of Bahá’ís from Russia by the authorities, a letter written
on his behalf explained, “At the time he referred to Russia
there were Bahá’ís there, now the Community has practically
ceased to exist; therefore the formation of the International
House of Justice cannot depend on a Russian National Spiritual
Assembly.”
In the same way, goals were specified by Shoghi Effendi for
the establishment of Bahá’í courts, including national courts in
certain countries in Asia and, as a step in the development of
the International Bahá’í Council, the precursor to the Universal
House of Justice, a court in the Holy Land. Recognition by the
Egyptian government of the National Spiritual Assembly as
an independent Bahá’í court was sought as far back as 1929.
Over time, changing conditions rendered the formation of
such religious courts impossible. As the Hands of the Cause
of God commented in 1959 in calling for the election of the
International Bahá’í Council and the eventual establishment of
the House of Justice,

9.22

We wish to assure the believers that every effort will be
made to establish a Bahá’í Court in the Holy Land prior
to the date set for this election. We should however bear
in mind that the Guardian himself clearly indicated this
goal, due to the strong trend towards the secularization
of Religious Courts in this part of the world, might not be
achieved.

9.24

9.23

***
Yet another question that has been raised concerns the
discharge by the Universal House of Justice of certain functions previously performed by the Guardian. With regard to
H
. uqúqu’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá has explained that “Disposition of
the H
. uqúq, wholly or partly, is permissible, but this should be
done by permission of the authority in the Cause to whom all
must turn.” Likewise, the expulsion of Covenant-breakers is an
obligation exercised by the Head of the Faith in the context of
the duty to protect the Cause from those who would seek to un57

9.25

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

9.26

9.27

dermine its unity. Shoghi Effendi, it is well known, was obliged
to expel Covenant-breakers from the Faith at different points
throughout his ministry, both before and after the appointment
of the Hands of the Cause of God. This responsibility now falls
on the Universal House of Justice, as the center of authority to
whom all must turn. The current procedures followed in this
respect are outlined in the statement “The Institution of the
Counsellors.”
In this connection it should be noted that after the passing
of Shoghi Effendi, although overwhelmed with grief, the Bahá’í
world maintained its unity during the tenuous period between
his ministry and the election of the Universal House of Justice.
The sole challenge to its integrity appeared some two years after
his death when Charles Mason Remey, who was at that time
one of the Hands of the Cause, laid claim to the Guardianship.
As you are aware, Remey asserted that his appointment in 1951
as president of the nascent International Bahá’í Council meant
that he should automatically assume the position of head of
the Universal House of Justice and was, therefore, the second
Guardian.
The absurdity of Remey’s claim is obvious and requires
little elaboration. In 1957, he was among the Hands of the
Cause who gathered in the Holy Land to consider what course
of action should be taken following the unexpected passing of
the Guardian. He personally affirmed that Shoghi Effendi had
appointed no successor, signing a document issued unanimously
by the Hands to this effect. As signatory to yet another such
document, he agreed that the entire body of the Hands of the
Cause would determine when and how the evolution of the
International Bahá’í Council would culminate in the election
of the House of Justice. For two years, as one of the nine
Hands designated to serve in the Holy Land, he participated
in the consultations that guided the development of the Bahá’í
community. Then, without notice or discussion with his fellow
Hands, he claimed the station of Guardianship, lacking explicit
appointment by Shoghi Effendi as specified in the Will and
Testament and in direct violation of the command of ‘Abdu’lBahá that no one could make such a claim. Exercising the
authority conferred on them in accordance with ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s
Will, the Hands of the Cause expelled him from the Faith as a
Covenant-breaker.
***
58

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

In matters related to the Covenant, the friends must be
firm and steadfast; they should be wary, lest the arguments put
forward by those who sow seeds of doubt become the cause for
confusion or lead to disputation and disunity. Should questions
arise that cannot be resolved, they should be placed immediately before the Universal House of Justice. The friends must
be especially careful to avoid being enticed by the whisperings
of the remnants of the Covenant-breakers and their supporters,
who seek to shake the believers’ faith. Whereas in the past the
violators of the Covenant sought to undermine the authority
of Bahá’u’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi, today they
challenge the Universal House of Justice. Of particular concern
are those who, as ‘Abdu’l-Bahá warns, “assert their firmness
and steadfastness in the Covenant but when they come across
responsive ears they secretly sow the seeds of suspicion.”
Remey’s small band of associates, bedevilled by half a
century of infighting among competing factions, have had negligible effect on the progress of the Faith. The flurry caused by
their actions does nothing more than shake a few lifeless twigs
and leaves from the tree of the Cause. Those who are naïve,
those who are not deepened in the Teachings or not firm in the
Covenant, those who are controlled by their egos and lust for
leadership can be misled and fall away. The friends are urged
to protect themselves and their community by adhering strictly
to the emphatic exhortations repeated throughout the Sacred
Texts. As ‘Abdu’l-Bahá states,

9.28

Unto the Most Holy Book every one must turn and
all that is not expressly recorded therein must be referred
to the Universal House of Justice. That which this body,
whether unanimously or by a majority doth carry, that is
verily the Truth and the Purpose of God Himself. Whoso
doth deviate therefrom is verily of them that love discord,
hath shown forth malice and turned away from the Lord of
the Covenant. By this House is meant that Universal House
of Justice which is to be elected from all countries, that is
from those parts in the East and West where the loved ones
are to be found, after the manner of the customary elections
in Western countries such as those of England….
And now, one of the greatest and most fundamental
principles of the Cause of God is to shun and avoid entirely the Covenant-breakers, for they will utterly destroy
the Cause of God, exterminate His Law and render of

9.30

59

9.29

9.31

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

9.32

9.33

no account all efforts exerted in the past. O friends! It
behooveth you to call to mind with tenderness the trials of
His Holiness, the Exalted One, and show your fidelity to
the Ever-Blest Beauty. The utmost endeavor must be exerted
lest all these woes, trials and afflictions, all this pure and
sacred blood that hath been shed so profusely in the Path
of God, may prove to be in vain….
O ye beloved of the Lord! Strive with all your heart to
shield the Cause of God from the onslaught of the insincere,
for souls such as these cause the straight to become crooked
and all benevolent efforts to produce contrary results.
The believers in the Cradle of the Faith, who have withstood for more than a century the onslaught of government and
clergy, who triumphed over the perils posed by the rebellions of
Azal and Muh.ammad-‘Alí, who severed themselves from those
who opposed Shoghi Effendi, will easily discount the spurious
and ridiculous arguments of those few individuals who vie
among themselves to exploit Remey’s deviation as a pretext for
attracting a handful of personal followers. Be assured of our
supplications at the Holy Threshold on behalf of the beloved
friends everywhere in that sacred land.
The Universal House of Justice

60

10
Rid.ván 2008
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
Thousands upon thousands, embracing the diversity of the
entire human family, are engaged in systematic study of the
Creative Word in an environment that is at once serious and
uplifting. As they strive to apply through a process of action, reflection and consultation the insights thus gained, they see their
capacity to serve the Cause rise to new levels. Responding to the
inmost longing of every heart to commune with its Maker, they
carry out acts of collective worship in diverse settings, uniting
with others in prayer, awakening spiritual susceptibilities,
and shaping a pattern of life distinguished for its devotional
character. As they call on one another in their homes and pay
visits to families, friends and acquaintances, they enter into
purposeful discussion on themes of spiritual import, deepen
their knowledge of the Faith, share Bahá’u’lláh’s message, and
welcome increasing numbers to join them in a mighty spiritual
enterprise. Aware of the aspirations of the children of the world
and their need for spiritual education, they extend their efforts
widely to involve ever-growing contingents of participants in
classes that become centers of attraction for the young and
strengthen the roots of the Faith in society. They assist junior
youth to navigate through a crucial stage of their lives and
to become empowered to direct their energies toward the advancement of civilization. And with the advantage of a greater
abundance of human resources, an increasing number of them
are able to express their faith through a rising tide of endeavors
that address the needs of humanity in both their spiritual and
material dimensions. Such is the panorama before us as we
pause this Rid.ván to observe the progress of the worldwide
Bahá’í community.

61

10.1

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
10.2

10.3

On several occasions we have indicated that the aim of the
series of global Plans that will carry the Bahá’í world to the
celebration of the centenary of the Faith’s Formative Age in
2021 will be achieved through marked progress in the activity
and development of the individual believer, of the institutions,
and of the community. At this, the midway point of what will
be a quarter of a century of consistent, focused exertion, the
evidences of increased capacity are everywhere apparent. Of
particular significance is the widening impact of the dynamism
flowing from the interactions between the three participants in
the Plan. Institutions, from the national to the local level, see
with ever-greater clarity how to create conditions conducive to
the expression of the spiritual energies of a growing number
of believers in pursuit of a common goal. The community is
serving more and more as that environment in which individual
effort and collective action, mediated by the institute, can complement each other in order to achieve progress. The vibrancy it
manifests and the unity of purpose that animates its endeavors
are drawing into its swelling ranks those from every walk of
life eager to dedicate their time and energies to the welfare of
humanity. That the doors of the community are more widely
open for any receptive soul to enter and receive sustenance
from Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation is clear. No greater testament is
there to the efficacy of the interactions among the Plan’s three
participants than the dramatic acceleration in the tempo of
teaching that was witnessed this past year. The advance made
in the process of entry by troops was significant indeed.
Within the sphere of these enhanced interactions, individual initiative is becoming increasingly effective. In previous
messages we have referred to the impetus that the institute
process imparts to the exercise of initiative by the individual
believer. The friends in every continent are engaged in study of
the Writings for the explicit purpose of learning to apply the
teachings to the growth of the Faith. Remarkable numbers are
now shouldering responsibility for the spiritual vitality of their
communities; energetically, they are carrying out those acts
of service befitting a healthy pattern of growth. As they have
persevered in the field of service to the Cause, maintaining a
humble posture of learning, their courage and wisdom, zeal
and acuity, fervor and circumspection, determination and trust
in God have combined all the more to reinforce one another.
In their presentation of the message of Bahá’u’lláh and the
62

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

exposition of its verities, they have taken to heart the words of
Shoghi Effendi that they must neither “hesitate” nor “falter,”
neither “overstress” nor “whittle down” the truth which they
champion. Neither are they “fanatical” nor “excessively liberal.” Through their constancy in teaching, they have increased
their ability to determine whether the receptivity of their
listener requires them to be “wary” or “bold,” to “act swiftly”
or to “mark time,” to be “direct” or “indirect” in the methods
they employ.
What we continue to find encouraging is how well disciplined is this individual initiative. Communities everywhere are
gradually internalizing the lessons being learned from systematization, and the framework defined by the current series of
Plans lends consistency and flexibility to the endeavors of the
friends. Far from restricting them, this framework enables them
to seize opportunities, to build relationships, and to translate
into reality a vision of systematic growth. In a word, it gives
shape to their collective powers.
As we survey what has been accomplished around the
world, our hearts are filled with particular admiration for the
believers in Iran, who, under the most arduous conditions,
have arisen boldly to serve their country and are bending their
energies toward its revitalization, though the avenues open
to them are limited. And given the restrictions placed on the
administration of the Faith, they have set out on an individual
basis to acquaint their fellow citizens with the teachings of
Bahá’u’lláh, directly engaging them in conversations about His
redeeming message. Not only have they received unprecedented
support from enlightened souls as they have begun to do so, but
they have encountered a receptivity far beyond anything they
would have imagined possible.
Every follower of Bahá’u’lláh conscious of the forces of
integration and disintegration operating in society today sees
the relationship between the rise in receptivity to the Faith in
all parts of the globe and the failings of the world’s systems.
That such receptivity will increase as the agonies of humanity
deepen is certain. Let there be no mistake: The capacity building
that has been set in motion to respond to mounting receptivity
is still in its earliest stages. The magnitude of the demands of
a world in disarray will test this capacity to its limits in the
years ahead. Humanity is battered by forces of oppression,
whether generated from the depths of religious prejudice or the
63

10.4

10.5

10.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

10.7

10.8

pinnacles of rampant materialism. Bahá’ís are able to discern
the causes of this affliction. “What ‘oppression’ is more grievous,” Bahá’u’lláh asks, “than that a soul seeking the truth, and
wishing to attain unto the knowledge of God, should know not
where to go for it and from whom to seek it?” There is no time
to lose. Continued progress must be achieved in the activity and
development of the three participants in the Plan.
‘Abdu’l-Bahá has extolled “two calls” to “success and prosperity” that can be heard from the “heights of the happiness of
mankind.” One is the call of “civilization,” of “progress of the
material world.” It comprises the “laws,” “regulations,” “arts
and sciences” through which humanity develops. The other is
the “soul-stirring call of God,” on which depends the eternal
happiness of humanity. “This second call,” the Master has explained, “is founded upon the instructions and exhortations of
the Lord and the admonitions and altruistic emotions belonging
to the realm of morality which, like unto a brilliant light,
brighten and illumine the lamp of the realities of mankind. Its
penetrative power is the Word of God.” As you continue to
labor in your clusters, you will be drawn further and further
into the life of the society around you and will be challenged
to extend the process of systematic learning in which you are
engaged to encompass a growing range of human endeavors.
In the approaches you take, the methods you adopt, and the
instruments you employ, you will need to achieve the same
degree of coherence that characterizes the pattern of growth
presently under way.
Sustaining growth in cluster after cluster will depend on
the qualities that distinguish your service to the peoples of
the world. So free must be your thoughts and actions of any
trace of prejudice—racial, religious, economic, national, tribal,
class, or cultural—that even the stranger sees in you loving
friends. So high must be your standard of excellence and so
pure and chaste your lives that the moral influence you exert
penetrates the consciousness of the wider community. Only if
you demonstrate the rectitude of conduct to which the writings
of the Faith call every soul will you be able to struggle against
the myriad forms of corruption, overt and subtle, eating at the
vitals of society. Only if you perceive honor and nobility in every human being—this independent of wealth or poverty—will
you be able to champion the cause of justice. And to the extent
that administrative processes of your institutions are governed
64

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

by the principles of Bahá’í consultation will the great masses of
humanity be able to take refuge in the Bahá’í community.
As you press ahead, be confident that the Concourse on
high is marshaling its forces and stands ready to come to your
aid. Our continued prayers will surround you.
The Universal House of Justice

65

10.9

11
20 October 2008
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
Today, the anniversary of the Birth of the Báb, marks the
midway point of the five-year enterprise that will engage the
Bahá’í world until Rid.ván 2011. We bow our heads in humble
gratitude to Bahá’u’lláh for the favors and confirmations He
has vouchsafed unto those laboring so diligently and sacrificially in the forefront of the teaching work. Since the conclusion of
the Tenth International Bahá’í Convention a few months ago,
there has been a rise in awareness of the efficacy of the framework governing the operation of the Five Year Plan as insights
gained by the delegates have been widely diffused throughout
the Bahá’í community. Scores of clusters around the globe are
being primed for systematic expansion, and we expect to see a
wave of intensive programs of growth launched in the months
leading up to Rid.ván next year.
The challenge facing the friends in these and all clusters
continues to be twofold in character. While learning to identify
receptive segments of society and share with responsive souls
the message of the Faith—an aspiration generally not difficult
to fulfill—they are striving to understand in practice how the
diverse elements of a healthy pattern of growth, particularly
the development of human resources, are to be integrated into a
cohesive whole. How heartening it is to see that the moment the
friends in a cluster begin to meet this dual challenge, immediate
progress is achieved; the goal of launching an intensive program
of growth becomes imminently attainable.
That the continued strengthening of the community should
be matched by a further decline in the old world order comes
as no surprise. Indeed, the friends should be on their guard, lest
the development of capacity in the community not keep pace
with the rise in receptivity of a disillusioned humanity. Behold
67

11.1

11.2

11.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

11.4

how even in the short span of time since we raised this warning
in our Rid.ván message, financial structures once thought to be
impregnable have tottered and world leaders have shown their
inability to devise more than temporary solutions, a failing to
which they increasingly confess. Whatever expedient measures
are adopted, confidence has been shaken and a sense of security
lost. Surely such developments have caused the believers in
every land to reflect on the lamentable condition of the present
order and have reinforced in them the conviction that material
and spiritual civilization must be advanced together.
It is with these thoughts in mind that we turn our hearts in
frequent prayer to Bahá’u’lláh and beseech Him to strengthen
His followers through His unfailing grace. In such moments, we
implore Him to illumine their souls with the light of knowledge
and faith. Let them not underestimate the power inherent in
the system they are putting in place for the propagation of His
Faith, nor mistake the true purpose of the global enterprise
on which they have embarked. Let them not deviate from the
path of learning on which they are set, nor be distracted by the
ephemeral pursuits of a bewildered society. Let them not fail
to appreciate the value of the culture now taken root in the
community that promotes the systematic study of the Creative
Word in small groups in order to build capacity for service. Let
them never forget the imperative to tend to the needs of the
children of the world and offer them lessons that develop their
spiritual faculties and lay the foundations of a noble and upright character. Let them come to realize the full significance of
their efforts to help young people form a strong moral identity
in their early adolescent years and empower them to contribute
to the well-being of their communities. And let them rejoice at
having learned through consistent, systematic action how to
establish a rhythm of growth that pays due attention to the
essential elements of expansion, consolidation, reflection and
planning. May they one and all be endowed with constancy and
fidelity and be granted the courage to make whatever sacrifices
are needed to ensure the resounding success of the Plan. By the
rectitude of their conduct, the sincerity of their love for their
fellow human beings, and the ardor of their desire to serve the
peoples of the world, may they vindicate the truth proclaimed
by Bahá’u’lláh that humanity is one. May they be diligent in
their efforts to establish ties of friendship that show no regard
for prevalent social barriers and ceaselessly endeavor to bind
68

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

hearts together in the love of God. That they may recognize the
profound implications of their mission is our fervent hope. That
they may not falter in accomplishing their ambitious goals, no
matter how severe the crises engulfing the world around them,
is our most heartfelt prayer at the Sacred Threshold.
To provide the opportunity for the friends to gather together, as much to celebrate the feats already achieved during
the Plan as to deliberate on its current exigencies, we announce
the convocation of a series of regional conferences, forty-one
in number, to be held in the following cities between November
and March: Abidjan, Accra, Almaty, Antofagasta, Atlanta,
Auckland, Baku, Bangalore, Bangui, Battambang, Bologna,
Bukavu, Chicago, Dallas, Frankfurt, Guadalajara, Istanbul,
Johannesburg, Kiev, Kolkata, Kuala Lumpur, Kuching, Lae,
London, Los Angeles, Lubumbashi, Lusaka, Madrid, Managua,
Manila, Nakuru, New Delhi, Portland, Quito, São Paulo,
Stamford, Sydney, Toronto, Ulaanbaatar, Vancouver, Yaoundé.
To each of these conferences, two members of the International
Teaching Centre will be sent as our representatives. National
Spiritual Assemblies in hosting countries will have further
details available regarding participation. We urge the believers,
both those fully engaged in executing the provisions of the Plan
and those whose circumstances have prevented them from fulfilling their desire to do so until now, to avail themselves of this
opportunity and attend the conference to be held in their area.
The Universal House of Justice

69

11.5

12
Rid.ván 2009
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
A mere three years ago we set before the Bahá’í world
the challenge of exploiting the framework for action that had
emerged with such clarity at the conclusion of the last global
Plan. The response, as we had hoped, was immediate. With
great vigor the friends everywhere began to pursue the goal
of establishing intensive programs of growth in no less than
1,500 clusters worldwide, and the number of such programs
soon started to climb. But no one could have imagined then
how profoundly the Lord of Hosts, in His inscrutable wisdom,
intended to transform His community in so short a span of
time. What a purposeful and confident community it was
that celebrated its accomplishments at the midway point of
the current Plan in forty-one regional conferences across the
globe! What an extraordinary contrast did its coherence and
energy provide to the bewilderment and confusion of a world
caught in a spiral of crisis! This, indeed, was the community
of the blissful to which the Guardian had referred. This was a
community aware of the vast potentialities with which it has
been endowed and conscious of the role it is destined to play
in rebuilding a broken world. This was a community in the
ascendant, subject to severe repression in one part of the globe,
yet rising up undeterred and undismayed as a united whole
and strengthening its capacity to achieve Bahá’u’lláh’s purpose
to liberate humankind from the yoke of the most grievous
oppression. And in the nearly eighty-thousand participants who
attended the conferences we saw the emergence on the historical scene of an individual believer supremely confident in the
efficacy of the Plan’s methods and instruments and remarkably
deft at wielding them. Each and every soul of this mighty sea
stood as testimony to the transforming potency of the Faith.
71

12.1

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

Each and every one was evidence of Bahá’u’lláh’s promise to
assist all those who arise with detachment and sincerity to
serve Him. Each and every one offered a glimpse of that race
of beings, consecrated and courageous, pure and sanctified,
destined to evolve over generations under the direct influence
of Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation. In them we saw the first signs of
the fulfillment of our hope expressed at the outset of the Plan
that the edifying influence of the Faith would be extended to
hundreds of thousands through the institute process. There
is every indication that, by the end of the Rid.ván period, the
number of intensive programs of growth around the world
will have crossed the 1,000 mark. What more can we do at the
opening of this most joyous Festival than to bow our heads
in humility before God and offer Him thanksgiving for His
unbounded generosity to the community of the Greatest Name.
The Universal House of Justice

72

13
1 January 2010
To the Friends Gathered at the
Youth Conference in the United Kingdom
We have watched with admiration the eagerness with
which the youth in the United Kingdom have stepped into the
vanguard of the work of the Cause, reaching out to ever greater
numbers of souls and engaging them in the c­ ommunity-building
activities that lie at the heart of the Five Year Plan. Your earnestness, your energy, your intrepid determination not to shirk
the demands of this Day mark you out for this all-important
undertaking. Ably trained, spiritually enkindled, and eager
for experience, you have arisen to seize the initiative in your
immediate surroundings and beyond. The need for you to
apply yourselves to service in two capacities in particular—as
teachers of children’s classes and as animators of junior youth
groups—has never been more apparent. Countless parents
yearn for the means of developing their children’s spiritual
faculties that would lay within them the foundations of a principled and upright character. And surely every young person
will flourish in a program that helps to form a strong moral
identity in the critical years of early adolescence and empowers
participants to contribute to the well-being of society. Beyond
these specific fields of activity, you must not refrain from
acquainting your peers with the potent, the compelling, the
world-embracing mission with which you are charged. Which
of them would not feel their spirits enriched for contemplating
how, through the application of those far-reaching principles
enunciated by Bahá’u’lláh, the regeneration of the world can
be accomplished and its perplexing crises resolved? Which of
them would not be raised to a new consciousness of humanity’s
capacity to “carry forward an ever-advancing civilization” by
combining their energies with yours and bending them towards
this noble aim?
73

13.1

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
13.2

That the spirit of this gathering may galvanize your energies
and strengthen your resolve; that you may pledge to intensify
your efforts in the path of service to humankind; above all,
that you may be the recipients of an outpouring of the favors
vouchsafed by the Blessed Beauty to those who arise for
His Cause—these are our ardent supplications at the Sacred
Threshold.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
The Universal House of Justice

74

14
Rid.ván 2010
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
With hearts filled with admiration for the followers of
Bahá’u’lláh, we are pleased to announce that, as this most
joyous Rid.ván season opens, there is in every continent of the
globe a fresh complement of intensive programs of growth
under way, raising the total number worldwide over the 1,500
mark and securing the goal of the Five Year Plan, one year
in advance of its conclusion. We bow our heads in gratitude
to God for this astounding achievement, this signal victory.
All who have labored in the field will appreciate the bounty
He has bestowed on His community in granting it a full year
to strengthen the pattern of expansion and consolidation now
everywhere established, in preparation for the tasks it will be
called upon to undertake in its next global enterprise—a plan
of five years’ duration, the fifth in a series with the explicit aim
of advancing the process of entry by troops.
We feel moved, as we take pause on this festive occasion,
to make clear that what evokes such a deep sense of pride and
gratitude in our hearts is not so much the numerical feat you
have achieved, remarkable as it is, but a combination of developments at the more profound level of culture, to which this
accomplishment attests. Chief among them is the rise we have
observed in the capacity of the friends to converse with others
on spiritual matters and to speak with ease about the Person
of Bahá’u’lláh and His Revelation. They have understood well
that teaching is a basic requirement of a life of generous giving.
In recent messages we have expressed joy at witnessing
the steady increase in the tempo of teaching across the globe.
The discharge of this fundamental spiritual obligation by the
individual believer has always been, and continues to be, an
indispensable feature of Bahá’í life. What the establishment of
75

14.1

14.2

14.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

14.4

14.5

1,500 intensive programs of growth has made evident is how
courageous and deliberate the rank and file of the believers have
become in stepping outside their immediate circle of family
members and friends, ready to be led by the guiding Hand of
the All-Merciful to receptive souls in whatever quarter they may
reside. Even the most modest estimates suggest that there are
now tens of thousands who participate in periodic campaigns to
establish ties of friendship, on the basis of shared understanding, with those previously regarded as strangers.
In their efforts to present the essentials of the Faith plainly
and unequivocally, the believers have benefited greatly from
the illustrative example in Book 6 of the Ruhi Institute. Where
the logic underlying that presentation is appreciated, and the
urge to convert it into a formula overcome, it gives rise to a
conversation between two souls—a conversation distinguished
by the depth of understanding achieved and the nature of the
relationship established. To the extent that the conversation
continues beyond the initial encounter and veritable friendships
are formed, a direct teaching effort of this kind can become a
catalyst for an enduring process of spiritual transformation.
Whether the first contact with such newly found friends elicits
an invitation for them to enroll in the Bahá’í community or
to participate in one of its activities is not an overwhelming
concern. More important is that every soul feel welcome to
join the community in contributing to the betterment of society,
commencing a path of service to humanity on which, at the
outset or further along, formal enrollment can occur.
The significance of this development should not be underestimated. In every cluster, once a consistent pattern of action
is in place, attention needs to be given to extending it more
broadly through a network of coworkers and acquaintances,
while energies are, at the same time, focused on smaller pockets
of the population, each of which should become a center of
intense activity. In an urban cluster, such a center of activity
might best be defined by the boundaries of a neighborhood; in a
cluster that is primarily rural in character, a small village would
offer a suitable social space for this purpose. Those who serve
in these settings, both local inhabitants and visiting teachers,
would rightly view their work in terms of community building.
To assign to their teaching efforts such labels as “door-to-door,”
even though the first contact may involve calling upon the residents of a home without prior notice, would not do justice to a
76

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

process that seeks to raise capacity within a population to take
charge of its own spiritual, social and intellectual development.
The activities that drive this process, and in which newly found
friends are invited to engage—meetings that strengthen the
devotional character of the community; classes that nurture the
tender hearts and minds of children; groups that channel the
surging energies of junior youth; circles of study, open to all,
that enable people of varied backgrounds to advance on equal
footing and explore the application of the teachings to their
individual and collective lives—may well need to be maintained
with assistance from outside the local population for a time.
It is to be expected, however, that the multiplication of these
core activities would soon be sustained by human resources
indigenous to the neighborhood or village itself—by men and
women eager to improve material and spiritual conditions
in their surroundings. A rhythm of community life should
gradually emerge, then, commensurate with the capacity of an
expanding nucleus of individuals committed to Bahá’u’lláh’s
vision of a new World Order.
Within this context, receptivity manifests itself in a willingness to participate in the process of community building set
in motion by the core activities. In cluster after cluster where
an intensive program of growth is now in operation, the task
before the friends this coming year is to teach within one or
more receptive populations, employing a direct method in their
exposition of the fundamentals of their Faith, and find those
souls longing to shed the lethargy imposed on them by society
and work alongside one another in their neighborhoods and
villages to begin a process of collective transformation. If the
friends persist in their efforts to learn the ways and methods of
community building in small settings in this way, the long-cherished goal of universal participation in the affairs of the Faith
will, we are certain, move by several orders of magnitude within
grasp.
To meet this challenge, the believers and the institutions
that serve them will have to strengthen the institute process
in the cluster, increasing significantly within its borders the
number of those capable of acting as tutors of study circles;
for it should be recognized that the opportunity now open to
the friends to foster a vibrant community life in neighborhoods
and villages, characterized by such a keen sense of purpose, was
only made possible by crucial developments that occurred over
77

14.6

14.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

14.8

14.9

the past decade in that aspect of Bahá’í culture which pertains
to deepening.
When in December 1995 we called for the establishment of
training institutes worldwide, the pattern most prevalent in the
Bahá’í community for helping individual believers to deepen
their knowledge of the Faith consisted principally of occasional
courses and classes, of varying durations, addressing a variety
of subjects. That pattern had satisfied well the needs of an
emerging worldwide Bahá’í community, still relatively few in
number and concerned chiefly with its geographic spread across
the globe. We made clear at the time, however, that another
approach to the study of the writings would have to take shape,
one that would spur large numbers into the field of action, if the
process of entry by troops was to accelerate appreciably. In this
connection, we asked that training institutes assist ever-growing
contingents of believers in serving the Cause through the
provision of courses that would impart the knowledge, insights
and skills required to carry out the many tasks associated with
accelerated expansion and consolidation.
To read the writings of the Faith and to strive to obtain a more adequate understanding of the significance of
Bahá’u’lláh’s stupendous Revelation are obligations laid on
every one of His followers. All are enjoined to delve into
the ocean of His Revelation and to partake, in keeping with
their capacities and inclinations, of the pearls of wisdom that
lie therein. In this light, local deepening classes, winter and
summer schools, and specially arranged gatherings in which
individual believers knowledgeable in the writings were able
to share with others insights into specific subjects emerged
naturally as prominent features of Bahá’í life. Just as the
habit of daily reading will remain an integral part of Bahá’í
identity, so will these forms of study continue to hold a place
in the collective life of the community. But understanding the
implications of the Revelation, both in terms of individual
growth and social progress, increases manifold when study
and service are joined and carried out concurrently. There, in
the field of service, knowledge is tested, questions arise out of
practice, and new levels of understanding are achieved. In the
system of distance education that has now been established
in country after country—the principal elements of which
include the study circle, the tutor and the curriculum of the
Ruhi Institute—the worldwide Bahá’í community has acquired
78

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

the capacity to enable thousands, nay millions, to study the
writings in small groups with the explicit purpose of translating
the Bahá’í teachings into reality, carrying the work of the Faith
forward into its next stage: sustained large-scale expansion and
consolidation.
Let no one fail to appreciate the possibilities thus created.
Passivity is bred by the forces of society today. A desire to
be entertained is nurtured from childhood, with increasing
efficiency, cultivating generations willing to be led by whoever
proves skilful at appealing to superficial emotions. Even in
many ­educational systems students are treated as though they
were receptacles designed to receive information. That the
Bahá’í world has succeeded in developing a culture which
promotes a way of thinking, studying, and acting, in which all
consider themselves as treading a common path of service—
supporting one another and advancing together, respectful of
the know­ledge that each one possesses at any given moment
and avoiding the tendency to divide the believers into categories
such as deepened and uninformed—is an accomplishment of
enormous proportions. And therein lie the dynamics of an
irrepressible movement.
What is imperative is that the quality of the educational
process fostered at the level of the study circle rise markedly
over the next year so that the potential of local populations
to create such dynamics is realized. Much will fall on those
who serve as tutors in this respect. Theirs will be the challenge
to provide the environment that is envisioned in the institute
courses, an environment conducive to the spiritual empowerment of individuals, who will come to see themselves as active
agents of their own learning, as protagonists of a constant
effort to apply knowledge to effect individual and collective
transformation. Failing this, no matter how many study circles
are formed in a cluster, the force necessary to propel change
will not be generated.
If the work of the tutor is to reach higher and higher
degrees of excellence, it must be remembered that primary
responsibility for the development of human resources in
a region or country rests with the training institute. While
striving to increase the number of its participants, the institute
as a structure—from the board, to the coordinators at different
levels, to the tutors at the grass roots—must lay equal stress
on the effectiveness of the system in its entirety, for, in the final
79

14.10

14.11

14.12

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

14.13

analysis, sustained quantitative gains will be contingent on
qualitative progress. At the level of the cluster, the coordinator
must bring both practical experience and dynamism to his or
her efforts to accompany those who serve as tutors. He or she
should arrange periodic gatherings for them to reflect on their
endeavors. Events organized to repeat the study of segments
selected from the institute material may occasionally prove
helpful, provided they do not inculcate a need for perpetual
training. The capabilities of a tutor develop progressively
as an individual enters the field of action and assists others in
contributing to the aim of the present series of global Plans,
through study of the sequence of courses and implementation
of their practical component. And as men and women of
various ages move along the sequence and complete their study
of each course with the help of tutors, others must stand ready
to accompany them in acts of service undertaken according
to their strengths and interests—particularly the coordinators
responsible for children’s classes, for junior youth groups and
for study circles, acts of service crucial to the perpetuation of
the system itself. To ensure that the proper measure of vitality is
pulsating through this system should continue to be the object
of intense learning in every country over the course of the next
twelve months.
Concern for the spiritual education of children has long
been an element of the culture of the Bahá’í community, a concern that resulted in two, coexisting realities. One, emulating
the achievements of the Bahá’ís of Iran, was characterized by
the capacity to offer systematic classes, from grade to grade, to
children from Bahá’í families, generally with the aim of imparting basic knowledge of the history and teachings of the Faith
to rising generations. In most parts of the world, the number
who benefited from such classes has been relatively small. The
other reality emerged in areas where large-scale enrollments
took place, both rural and urban. A more inclusive attitude
dominated that experience. Yet while children from households
of all kinds were at once eager and welcome to attend Bahá’í
classes, various factors prevented lessons from being conducted
with the required degree of regularity, year after year. How
pleased we are to see this duality, a consequence of historical
circumstances, begin to fall away as friends trained by institutes
everywhere strive to offer classes, open to all, on a systematic
basis.
80

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Such promising beginnings have now to be vigorously
pursued. In every cluster with an intensive program of growth
in operation, efforts need to be made to systematize further
the provision of spiritual education to increasing numbers of
children, from families of many backgrounds—a requisite of
the community-building process gathering momentum in neighborhoods and villages. This will be a demanding task, one that
calls for patience and cooperation on the part of parents and
institutions alike. The Ruhi Institute has already been requested
to expedite plans to complete its courses for training children’s
class teachers at different levels including the corresponding
lessons, starting with youngsters aged 5 or 6 and proceeding to
those aged 10 or 11, in order to close the present gap between
existing lessons and its textbooks for junior youth, such as
Spirit of Faith and the forthcoming Power of the Holy Spirit,
which provide a distinctly Bahá’í component to the program
for that age group. As these additional courses and lessons
become available, institutes in every country will be able to
prepare the teachers and the coordinators required to put in
place, grade by grade, the core of a program for the spiritual
education of children, around which secondary elements can
be organized. Meanwhile, institutes should do their best to
provide teachers with suitable materials, from among others
currently in existence, for use in their classes with children of
various ages, as necessary.
The International Teaching Centre has earned our abiding
gratitude for the vital impetus it lent to the efforts to secure
the early attainment of the goal of the Five Year Plan. To see
the degree of energy it brought to this worldwide enterprise,
following so tenaciously the progress in every continent and
collaborating so closely with the Continental Counsellors, was
to catch a glimpse of the tremendous power inherent in the
Administrative Order. As the Teaching Centre now turns its
attention with equal vigor to questions related to the efficacy
of activities at the cluster level, it will no doubt give special
consideration to the implementation of Bahá’í children’s classes.
We are confident that its analysis of the experience gained in a
few selected clusters this coming year, representative of diverse
social realities, will shed light on practical issues which will
make possible the establishment of regular classes, for children
of every age, in neighborhoods and villages.

81

14.14

14.15

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
14.16

14.17

The rapid spread of the program for the spiritual empowerment of junior youth is yet another expression of cultural
advance in the Bahá’í community. While global trends project
an image of this age group as problematic, lost in the throes
of tumultuous physical and emotional change, unresponsive
and self-consumed, the Bahá’í community—in the language it
employs and the approaches it adopts—is moving decidedly in
the opposite direction, seeing in junior youth instead altruism,
an acute sense of justice, eagerness to learn about the universe
and a desire to contribute to the construction of a better world.
Account after account, in which junior youth in countries all
over the planet give voice to their thoughts as participants in
the program, testifies to the validity of this vision. There is every
indication that the program engages their expanding consciousness in an exploration of reality that helps them to analyze the
constructive and destructive forces operating in society and to
recognize the influence these forces exert on their thoughts and
actions, sharpening their spiritual perception, enhancing their
powers of expression and reinforcing moral structures that will
serve them throughout their lives. At an age when burgeoning
intellectual, spiritual and physical powers become accessible to
them, they are being given the tools needed to combat the forces
that would rob them of their true identity as noble beings and
to work for the common good.
That the major component of the program explores themes
from a Bahá’í perspective, but not in the mode of religious
instruction, has opened the way for its extension to junior
youth in a variety of settings and circumstances. In many
such instances, then, those who implement the program enter
confidently into the area of social action, encountering a range
of questions and possibilities, which are being followed and
organized in a global process of learning by the Office of Social
and Economic Development in the Holy Land. Already the
accumulating body of knowledge and experience has given rise
to the capacity in several clusters scattered across the globe to
each sustain over one thousand junior youth in the program.
To help others advance swiftly in this direction, the Office
is establishing a network of sites in all continents, with the
assistance of a corps of believers, that can be used to provide
training to coordinators from scores upon scores of clusters.
These resource persons continue to support coordinators upon
their return to their respective clusters, enabling them to create
82

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

a spiritually charged environment in which the junior youth
program can take root.
Further knowledge is sure to accrue in this area of endeavor,
although a pattern of action is already clear. Only the capacity
of the Bahá’í community limits the extent of its response to the
demand for the program by schools and civic groups. Within
the clusters that today are the focus of an intensive program
of growth, there is a wide array of circumstances, from those
with a few sporadic junior youth groups to those maintaining
a number sufficient to require the services of a dedicated
coordinator, who could receive ongoing support from a site
for the dissemination of learning. To ensure that this capacity
increases across the entire spectrum of these clusters, we are
calling for 32 learning sites, each serving some twenty clusters
with full-time coordinators, to be in operation by the end of
the current Plan. In all other such clusters, priority should be
given to creating the capacity over the coming year to offer the
program, multiplying the number of groups systematically.

14.18

***
The developments we have mentioned thus far—the rise in
capacity to teach the Faith directly and to enter into purposeful
discussion on themes of spiritual import with people from every
walk of life, the efflorescence of an approach to study of the
writings that is wedded to action, the renewal of commitment
to provide spiritual education to the young in neighborhoods
and villages on a regular basis, and the spread in influence of
a program that instills in junior youth the sense of a twofold
moral purpose, to develop their inherent potentialities and to
contribute to the transformation of society—are all reinforced,
in no small measure, by yet another advance at the level of
culture, the implications of which are far-reaching indeed.
This evolution in collective consciousness is discernable in the
growing frequency with which the word “accompany” appears
in conversations among the friends, a word that is being
endowed with new meaning as it is integrated into the common
vocabulary of the Bahá’í community. It signals the significant
strengthening of a culture in which learning is the mode of
operation, a mode that fosters the informed participation of
more and more people in a united effort to apply Bahá’u’lláh’s
teachings to the construction of a divine civilization, which the
Guardian states is the primary mission of the Faith. Such an
83

14.19

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

14.20

14.21

approach offers a striking contrast to the spiritually bankrupt
and moribund ways of an old social order that so often seeks
to harness human energy through domination, through greed,
through guilt or through manipulation.
In relationships among the friends, then, this development
in culture finds expression in the quality of their interactions.
Learning as a mode of operation requires that all assume a posture of humility, a condition in which one becomes forgetful of
self, placing complete trust in God, reliant on His all-sustaining
power and confident in His unfailing assistance, knowing that
He, and He alone, can change the gnat into an eagle, the drop
into a boundless sea. And in such a state souls labor together
ceaselessly, delighting not so much in their own accomplishments but in the progress and services of others. So it is that
their thoughts are centered at all times on helping one another
scale the heights of service to His Cause and soar in the heaven
of His knowledge. This is what we see in the present pattern of
activity unfolding across the globe, propagated by young and
old, by veteran and newly enrolled, working side by side.
Not only does this advance in culture influence relations
among individuals, but its effects can also be felt in the conduct
of the administrative affairs of the Faith. As learning has come
to distinguish the community’s mode of operation, certain
aspects of decision making related to expansion and consolidation have been assigned to the body of the believers, enabling
planning and implementation to become more responsive to
circumstances on the ground. Specifically, a space has been created, in the agency of the reflection meeting, for those engaged
in activities at the cluster level to assemble from time to time in
order to reach consensus on the current status of their situation,
in light of experience and guidance from the institutions, and
to determine their immediate steps forward. A similar space
is opened by the institute, which makes provision for those
serving as tutors, children’s class teachers, and animators of
junior youth groups in a cluster to meet severally and consult
on their experience. Intimately connected to this grassroots
consultative process are the agencies of the training institute
and the Area Teaching Committee, together with the Auxiliary
Board members, whose joint interactions provide another
space in which decisions pertaining to growth are taken, in this
case with a higher degree of formality. The workings of this
cluster-level system, born of exigencies, point to an important
84

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

characteristic of Bahá’í administration: Even as a living organism, it has coded within it the capacity to accommodate higher
and higher degrees of complexity, in terms of structures and
processes, relationships and activities, as it evolves under the
guidance of the Universal House of Justice.
That the institutions of the Faith at all levels—from the local
and the regional, to the national and the continental—are able
to manage such growing complexity with greater and greater
dexterity is both a sign and a necessity of their steady maturation. Evolving relationships among administrative structures
have brought the Local Spiritual Assembly to the threshold of
a new stage in the exercise of its responsibilities to diffuse the
Word of God, to mobilize the energies of the believers, and to
forge an environment that is spiritually edifying. On previous
occasions we have explained that the maturity of a Spiritual
Assembly cannot be assessed by the regularity of its meetings
and the efficiency of its functioning alone. Rather its strength
must be measured, to a large extent, by the vitality of the
spiritual and social life of the community it serves—a growing
community that welcomes the constructive contributions of
both those who are formally enrolled and those who are not. It
is gratifying to see that current approaches, methods and instruments are providing the means for Local Spiritual Assemblies,
even those newly formed, to fulfill these responsibilities as they
set about to ensure that the requirements of the Five Year Plan
are adequately met in their localities. Indeed, the Assembly’s
proper involvement with the Plan becomes crucial to every
attempt to embrace large numbers—itself a requisite for the
manifestation of the full range of its powers and capacities.
The development that we are sure to witness in Local
Spiritual Assemblies over the next several years is made possible
by the growing strength of National Spiritual Assemblies,
whose ability to think and act strategically has risen perceptibly, especially as they have learned to analyze the community-building process at the grass roots with increasing acuity
and effectiveness and to inject into it, as needed, assistance,
resources, encouragement, and loving guidance. In countries
where conditions demand it, they have devolved a number
of their responsibilities in this respect to Regional Councils,
decentralizing certain administrative functions, enhancing institutional capacity in areas under their jurisdiction, and fostering
more sophisticated sets of interactions. It is no exaggeration
85

14.22

14.23

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

14.24

to say that the full engagement of National Assemblies was
instrumental in creating the final thrust required to attain the
goal of the current Plan, and we expect to see further developments in this direction as, in concert with the Counsellors,
they exert in the course of the critical, fleeting months ahead
a supreme effort to ready their communities to embark on the
next five-year enterprise.
Without question, the evolution of the institution of the
Counsellors constitutes one of the most significant advances in
the Bahá’í Administrative Order during the past decade. That
institution had already made extraordinary leaps in its development when, in January 2001, the Counsellors and the Auxiliary
Board members gathered in the Holy Land for the conference
marking the occupation by the International Teaching Centre
of its permanent seat on Mount Carmel. There is no doubt that
the energies released by that event have propelled the institution rapidly forward. The degree of influence the Counsellors
and their auxiliaries have exerted on the progress of the Plan
demonstrates that they have assumed their natural place in the
forefront of the teaching field. We are confident that the coming
year will bind the institutions of the Administrative Order further together in collaboration, as all strive to reinforce, each in
accordance with its evolving functions and responsibilities, the
mode of learning that has become a prominent feature of the
community’s functioning—this, most urgently in those clusters
experiencing intensive programs of growth.
***

14.25

Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation is vast. It calls for profound
change not only at the level of the individual but also in the
structure of society. “Is not the object of every Revelation,”
He Himself proclaims, “to effect a transformation in the whole
character of mankind, a transformation that shall manifest
itself, both outwardly and inwardly, that shall affect both
its inner life and external conditions?” The work advancing
in every corner of the globe today represents the latest stage
of the ongoing Bahá’í endeavor to create the nucleus of the
glorious civilization enshrined in His teachings, the building
of which is an enterprise of infinite complexity and scale, one
that will demand centuries of exertion by humanity to bring
to fruition. There are no shortcuts, no formulas. Only as effort
is made to draw on insights from His Revelation, to tap into
86

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

the accumulating knowledge of the human race, to apply His
teachings intelligently to the life of humanity, and to consult on
the questions that arise will the necessary learning occur and
capacity be developed.
In this long-term process of capacity building, the Bahá’í
community has devoted nearly a decade and a half to systematizing its experience in the teaching field, learning to open
certain activities to more and more people and to sustain its
expansion and consolidation. All are welcome to enter the
community’s warm embrace and receive sustenance from
Bahá’u’lláh’s life-giving message. No greater joy is there, to be
sure, than for a soul, yearning for the Truth, to find shelter in
the stronghold of the Cause and draw strength from the unifying power of the Covenant. Yet every human being and every
group of individuals, irrespective of whether they are counted
among His followers, can take inspiration from His teachings,
benefiting from whatever gems of wisdom and knowledge will
aid them in addressing the challenges they face. Indeed, the
civilization that beckons humanity will not be attained through
the efforts of the Bahá’í community alone. Numerous groups
and organizations, animated by the spirit of world solidarity
that is an indirect manifestation of Bahá’u’lláh’s conception
of the principle of the oneness of humankind, will contribute
to the civilization destined to emerge out of the welter and
chaos of present-day society. It should be clear to everyone that
the capacity created in the Bahá’í community over successive
global Plans renders it increasingly able to lend assistance in
the manifold and diverse dimensions of civilization building,
opening to it new frontiers of learning.
In our Rid.ván 2008 message we indicated that, as the
friends continued to labor at the level of the cluster, they would
find themselves drawn further and further into the life of society
and would be challenged to extend the process of systematic
learning in which they are engaged to encompass a widening
range of human endeavors. A rich tapestry of community life
begins to emerge in every cluster as acts of communal worship,
interspersed with discussions undertaken in the intimate setting
of the home, are woven together with activities that provide
spiritual education to all members of the population—adults,
youth and children. Social consciousness is heightened naturally
as, for example, lively conversations proliferate among parents
regarding the aspirations of their children and service projects
87

14.26

14.27

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

14.28

14.29

spring up at the initiative of junior youth. Once human resources in a cluster are in sufficient abundance, and the pattern of
growth firmly established, the community’s engagement with
society can, and indeed must, increase. At this crucial point in
the unfoldment of the Plan, when so many clusters are nearing
such a stage, it seems appropriate that the friends everywhere
would reflect on the nature of the contributions which their
growing, vibrant communities will make to the material and
spiritual progress of society. In this respect, it will prove fruitful
to think in terms of two interconnected, mutually reinforcing
areas of activity: involvement in social action and participation
in the prevalent discourses of society.
Over the decades, the Bahá’í community has gained
much experience in these two areas of endeavor. There are, of
course, a great many Bahá’ís who are engaged as individuals in
social action and public discourse through their occupations.
A number of nongovernmental organizations, inspired by
the teachings of the Faith and operating at the regional and
national levels, are working in the field of social and economic
development for the betterment of their people. Agencies of
National Spiritual Assemblies are contributing through various
avenues to the promotion of ideas conducive to public welfare.
At the international level, agencies such as the United Nations
Office of the Bahá’í International Community are performing
a similar function. To the extent necessary and desirable, the
friends working at the grass roots of the community will draw
on this experience and capacity as they strive to address the
concerns of the society around them.
Most appropriately conceived in terms of a spectrum,
social action can range from fairly informal efforts of limited
duration undertaken by individuals or small groups of friends
to programs of social and economic development with a high
level of complexity and sophistication implemented by Bahá’íinspired organizations. Irrespective of its scope and scale, all
social action seeks to apply the teachings and principles of
the Faith to improve some aspect of the social or economic
life of a population, however modestly. Such endeavors
are distinguished, then, by their stated purpose to promote the
material well-being of the population, in addition to its spiritual
welfare. That the world civilization now on humanity’s horizon
must achieve a dynamic coherence between the material and
spiritual requirements of life is central to the Bahá’í teachings.
88

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Clearly this ideal has profound implications for the nature of
any social action pursued by Bahá’ís, whatever its scope and
range of influence. Though conditions will vary from country
to country, and perhaps from cluster to cluster, eliciting from
the friends a variety of endeavors, there are certain fundamental
concepts that all should bear in mind. One is the centrality of
knowledge to social existence. The perpetuation of ignorance
is a most grievous form of oppression; it reinforces the many
walls of prejudice that stand as barriers to the realization of
the oneness of humankind, at once the goal and operating
principle of Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation. Access to knowledge is
the right of every human being, and participation in its generation, application and diffusion a responsibility that all must
shoulder in the great enterprise of building a prosperous world
civilization—each individual according to his or her talents and
abilities. Justice demands universal participation. Thus, while
social action may involve the provision of goods and services
in some form, its primary concern must be to build capacity
within a given population to participate in creating a better
world. Social change is not a project that one group of people
carries out for the benefit of another. The scope and complexity
of social action must be commensurate with the human resources available in a village or neighborhood to carry it forward.
Efforts best begin, then, on a modest scale and grow organically
as capacity within the population develops. Capacity rises to
new levels, of course, as the protagonists of social change learn
to apply with increasing effectiveness elements of Bahá’u’lláh’s
Revelation, together with the contents and methods of science,
to their social reality. This reality they must strive to read in a
manner consistent with His teachings—seeing in their fellow
human beings gems of inestimable value and recognizing the
effects of the dual process of integration and disintegration on
both hearts and minds, as well as on social structures.
Effective social action serves to enrich participation in the
discourses of society, just as the insights gained from engaging
in certain discourses can help to clarify the concepts that shape
social action. At the level of the cluster, involvement in public
discourse can range from an act as simple as introducing Bahá’í
ideas into everyday conversation to more formal activities such
as the preparation of articles and attendance at gatherings,
dedicated to themes of social concern—climate change and the
environment, governance and human rights, to mention a few.
89

14.30

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

14.31

14.32

It entails, as well, meaningful interactions with civic groups and
local organizations in villages and neighborhoods.
In this connection, we feel compelled to raise a warning: It
will be important for all to recognize that the value of engaging
in social action and public discourse is not to be judged by the
ability to bring enrollments. Though endeavors in these two
areas of activity may well effect an increase in the size of the
Bahá’í community, they are not undertaken for this purpose.
Sincerity in this respect is an imperative. Moreover, care
should be exercised to avoid overstating the Bahá’í experience
or drawing undue attention to fledgling efforts, such as the
junior youth spiritual empowerment program, which are best
left to mature at their own pace. The watchword in all cases is
humility. While conveying enthusiasm about their beliefs, the
friends should guard against projecting an air of triumphalism,
hardly appropriate among themselves, much less in other
circumstances.
In describing for you these new opportunities now opening
at the level of the cluster, we are not asking you to alter in
any way your current course. Nor should it be imagined that
such opportunities represent an alternative arena of service,
competing with the expansion and consolidation work for the
community’s limited resources and energies. Over the coming
year, the institute process and the pattern of activity that it engenders should continue to be strengthened, and teaching should
remain uppermost in the mind of every believer. Further involvement in the life of society should not be sought prematurely. It
will proceed naturally as the friends in every cluster persevere
in applying the provisions of the Plan through a process of
action, reflection, consultation and study, and learn as a result.
Involvement in the life of society will flourish as the capacity
of the community to promote its own growth and to maintain
its vitality is gradually raised. It will achieve coherence with
efforts to expand and consolidate the community to the extent
that it draws on elements of the conceptual framework which
governs the current series of global Plans. And it will contribute
to the movement of populations towards Bahá’u’lláh’s vision of
a prosperous and peaceful world civilization to the degree that
it employs these elements creatively in new areas of learning.
***

90

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Dear Friends: How often did the Beloved Master express the
hope that the hearts of the believers would overflow with love
for one another, that they would abide no lines of separation
but would regard all of humanity even as one family. “See ye no
strangers,” is His exhortation; “rather see all men as friends, for
love and unity come hard when ye fix your gaze on otherness.”
All of the developments examined in the preceding pages are,
at the most profound level, but an expression of universal love
achieved through the power of the Holy Spirit. For is it not love
for God that burns away all veils of estrangement and division
and binds hearts together in perfect unity? Is it not His love that
spurs you on in the field of service and enables you to see in
every soul the capacity to know Him and to worship Him? Are
you not galvanized by the knowledge that His Manifestation
gladly endured a life of suffering out of His love for humanity?
Look within your own ranks, at your dear Bahá’í brothers and
sisters in Iran. Do they not exemplify fortitude born of the love
of God and the desire to serve Him? Does not their capacity to
transcend the cruelest and most bitter persecution bespeak the
capacity of millions upon millions of oppressed people of the
world to arise and take a decisive part in building the Kingdom
of God on earth? Undeterred by divisive social constructs, press
on and bring Bahá’u’lláh’s message to waiting souls in every urban neighborhood, in every rural hamlet, in every corner of the
globe, drawing them to His community, the community of the
Greatest Name. Never do you leave our thoughts and prayers,
and we will continue to implore the Almighty to reinforce you
with His wondrous grace.
The Universal House of Justice

91

14.33

15
29 August 2010
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s departure one hundred years ago from Haifa
for Port Said signalled the opening of a glorious new chapter
in the annals of the Faith. He was not to return to the Holy
Land for three years. Referring to that historic moment the
Guardian would later write: “The establishment of the Faith of
Bahá’u’lláh in the Western Hemisphere—the most outstanding
achievement that will forever be associated with ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s
ministry—had … set in motion such tremendous forces, and
been productive of such far-reaching results, as to warrant the
active and personal participation of the Center of the Covenant
Himself.” With the inauguration of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s travels to
the West, the Cause of Bahá’u’lláh, hemmed in for more than
half a century by the hosts of enmity and oppression, burst its
restraints. For the first time since its inception, the recognized
Head of the Faith enjoyed a freedom of action to pursue unencumbered its divinely prescribed mission.
By any earthly measure, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá would have seemed
ill prepared to carry out the task before Him. He was sixty-six
years old, an exile since childhood, with no formal schooling, a
prisoner for forty years, in failing health, and unfamiliar with
Western customs and languages. Yet He arose, without thought
of comfort, undeterred by the risks involved, and utterly
reliant upon divine assistance, to champion the Cause of God.
He interacted with diverse peoples in nine countries on three
continents. The scope and intensity of His tireless exertions
were such as to “dumbfound His followers in East and West
with admiration and wonder” and to “exercise an imperishable
influence” on the course of the Faith’s future.
Over the next few years, Bahá’ís around the world will
joyously call to mind the many episodes associated with
93

15.1

15.2

15.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s historic journey. But this anniversary is more
than a time for commemoration. The words uttered by ‘Abdu’lBahá during His travels, and the deeds He undertook with such
consummate wisdom and love, offer an abundance of inspiration and manifold insights from which the body of the believers
can today draw, whether in their efforts to embrace receptive
souls, to raise capacity for service, to build local communities,
to strengthen institutions, or to exploit opportunities emerging
to engage in social action and contribute to public discourse.
We should, therefore, reflect not only upon what the Master
achieved and set in motion but also on the work that remains
undone to which He has summoned us. In the Tablets of the
Divine Plan, He expressed His inmost longing:
15.4

O that I could travel, even though on foot and in the
utmost poverty, to these regions, and, raising the call of
“Yá Bahá’u’l-Abhá” in cities, villages, mountains, deserts
and oceans, promote the divine teachings! This, alas, I
cannot do. How intensely I deplore it! Please God, ye may
achieve it.

15.5

Nearly a century has passed since these words were recorded. Stage after stage of the Divine Plan has been successfully
prosecuted. The Faith has been established in all corners of the
world. We are present in those places that ‘Abdu’l-Bahá yearned
to visit. Individuals, communities, and institutions are now
endowed with the capacity necessary for systematic, sustained,
and coherent action. During this precious period of remembrance, then, let each and every one of His faithful lovers arise
and act in His Name. Let them offer their share, no matter how
humble, to the progress of the Plan He authored—that priceless
and everlasting bequest.
The Universal House of Justice

94

16
28 December 2010
To the Conference of the Continental Boards of Counsellors
Dearly loved Friends,
Fifteen years have elapsed since, on an occasion such as
this, we gave to the body of Counsellors assembled in the Holy
Land the first intimation of the course the Bahá’í community
would have to take, if it was to accelerate the dual process of its
expansion and consolidation—a course which its accumulated
experience had prepared it to steer with confidence. No need
to remark on the distance traversed in a short decade and a
half. The record of accomplishments speaks for itself. Today we
invite you to begin deliberations on the next stage of the great
enterprise on which the Bahá’í world is embarked, a stage that
will stretch from Rid.ván 2011 to Rid.ván 2016, constituting
the first of two consecutive Five Year Plans that will culminate
at the centenary of the inauguration of the Faith’s Formative
Age. Over the coming days you are asked to formulate a
clear conception of how the Counsellors and their auxiliaries
will assist the community in building on its extraordinary
achievements—extending to other spheres of operation the
mode of learning which has so undeniably come to characterize
its teaching endeavors, gaining the capacity needed to employ
with a high degree of coherence the instruments and methods
which it has so painstakingly developed, and increasing well
beyond all previous numbers the ranks of those who, alive to
the vision of the Faith, are laboring so assiduously in pursuit of
its God-given mission.
In our Rid.ván message this year, we described the dynamics
of the process of learning that, through four successive global
Plans, has steadily gathered momentum, enhancing the capacity
of the friends to engage in grassroots action. The vista from this
vantage point is stupendous indeed. With more than 350,000
souls worldwide who have completed the first institute course,
95

16.1

16.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.3

capacity to shape a pattern of life distinguished for its devotional character has risen perceptibly. In diverse settings, on every
continent, groups of believers are uniting with others in prayer,
turning their hearts in supplication to their Maker, and calling
to their aid those spiritual forces upon which the efficacy of
their individual and collective efforts depends. A near doubling
in the reserve of Bahá’í children’s class teachers in a five-year
period, bringing the total to some 130,000, has made it possible
for the community to respond wholeheartedly to the spiritual
aspirations of the young. A sixfold increase in capacity over the
same period to assist junior youth in navigating through such
a crucial stage of their lives provides an indication of the level
of commitment to that age group. What is more, everywhere, a
notable number of friends find themselves ready to enter into
conversation with people of varied backgrounds and interests
and to undertake with them an exploration of reality that gives
rise to a shared understanding of the exigencies of this period
in human history and the means for addressing them. And
fueling the systematic multiplication of core activities across the
globe, with no fewer than half a million known participants at
a given time, are the efforts of close to 70,000 friends capable
of serving as tutors of study circles.
As made clear in our Rid.ván message, in the system thus
created to develop its human resources, the community of the
Greatest Name possesses an instrument of limitless potentialities. Under a wide diversity of conditions, in virtually any
cluster, it is possible for an expanding nucleus of individuals
to generate a movement towards the goal of a new World
Order. A decade ago, when we introduced the concept of a
cluster—a geographic construct intended to facilitate thinking
about the growth of the Faith—we provided an outline of
four broad stages along the path of its development. As the
Bahá’í community set about implementing the provisions of the
Plan, this outline proved immensely useful in giving shape and
definition to what is essentially an ongoing process. The abundant experience which has since accrued enables the believers
now to conceive of the movement of a population, propelled
by mounting spiritual forces, in terms of a rich and dynamic
continuum. A brief review of the process that unfolds in a
cluster, though well familiar to you all, will serve to underscore
its fundamentally organic nature.

96

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

A program of growth
Invariably, opportunities afforded by the personal circumstances of the believers initially involved—or perhaps a single
homefront pioneer—to enter into meaningful and distinctive
conversation with local residents dictate how the process of
growth begins in a cluster. A study circle made up of a few
friends or colleagues, a class offered for several neighborhood
children, a group formed for junior youth during after-school
hours, a devotional gathering hosted for family and friends—
any one of these can serve as a stimulus to growth. What
happens next follows no predetermined course. Conditions may
justify that one core activity be given precedence, multiplying at
a rate faster than the others. It is equally possible that all four
would advance at a comparable pace. Visiting teams may be
called upon to provide impetus to the fledgling set of activities.
But irrespective of the specifics, the outcome must be the same.
Within every cluster, the level of cohesion achieved among the
core activities must be such that, in their totality, a nascent
program for the sustained expansion and consolidation of the
Faith can be perceived. That is to say, in whatever combination
and however small in number, devotional gatherings, children’s
classes and junior youth groups are being maintained by those
progressing through the sequence of institute courses and committed to the vision of individual and collective transformation
they foster. This initial flow of human resources into the field
of systematic action marks the first of several milestones in a
process of sustainable growth.
All of the institutions and agencies promoting the aim of
the current series of global Plans need to exercise the measure
of agility that the birth of such a dynamic process demands—
but none more so than the Auxiliary Board members. To help
the friends visualize this first important milestone, and the
multiplicity of ways in which it can be reached, is central to the
functioning of every Auxiliary Board member and an increasing
number of his or her assistants. In this, as in all their work, they
must display breadth of vision and clarity of thought, flexibility
and resourcefulness. They should stand shoulder to shoulder
with the friends, supporting them through their struggles and
partaking in their joys. Some of these friends will quickly move
to the forefront of activity, while others will step forward more
tentatively; yet all require support and encouragement, offered
not in the abstract but on the basis of that intimate knowledge
97

16.4

16.5

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

which is only acquired by working side by side in the field of
service. Faith in the capacity of every individual who shows a
desire to serve will prove essential to the efforts of those who
are to elicit from the believers wholehearted participation in
the Plan. Unqualified love free of paternalism will be indispensable if they are to help turn hesitation into courage born
of trust in God and transform a yearning for excitement into
a commitment to long-term action. Calm determination will
be vital as they strive to demonstrate how stumbling blocks
can be made stepping stones for progress. And a readiness to
listen, with heightened spiritual perception, will be invaluable in
identifying obstacles that may prevent some of the friends from
appreciating the imperative of unified action.

Increasing intensity
16.6

16.7

It is important to note that, as a program of growth is being
brought into existence, an emergent community spirit begins to
exert its influence on the course of events. Whether activities
are scattered across the cluster or concentrated in one village
or neighborhood, a sense of common purpose characterizes the
endeavors of the friends. Whatever level of organization served
to channel the early manifestations of this spirit, the systematic,
coordinated multiplication of core activities necessitates that
higher levels soon be attained. Through various measures,
greater structure is lent to activity, and initiative, shaped largely
by individual volition before, is now given collective expression.
A complement of coordinators appointed by the institute moves
into place—those for study circles, for junior youth groups, and
for children’s classes. Any order of appointment is potentially
valid. Nothing less than an acute awareness of circumstances on
the ground should make this determination, for what is at stake
is not compliance with a set of procedures but the unfoldment
of an educational process that has begun to show its potential
to bring about the spiritual empowerment of large numbers.
Parallel to the establishment of mechanisms to support the
institute process, other administrative structures are gradually
taking shape. Out of the occasional meetings of a few believers
emerge the regular deliberations of an expanding core group of
friends concerned with channeling into the field of service an
increasing store of energy. As the process of growth continues
to gather momentum, such an arrangement ultimately fails
to satisfy the demands of planning and decision making, and
98

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

an Area Teaching Committee is constituted, and reflection
meetings institutionalized. In the joint interactions of the
Committee, the institute and the Auxiliary Board members, a
fully fledged scheme for the coordination of activities becomes
operational—with all the inherent capacity needed to facilitate
the efficient flow of guidance, funds, and information. By now,
the process of growth in the cluster will conform to the rhythm
established by pronounced cycles of expansion and consolidation, which, punctuated every three months by a meeting for
reflection and planning, are unfolding without interruption.
Here again, it is for the Auxiliary Board members and
other relevant institutions and agencies, such as the Regional
Council and institute board, to ensure that administrative
structures being forged in the cluster take on the requisite
characteristics. Specifically, the sequence of courses that we
have recommended for use by institutes everywhere, which
is facilitating so effectively the process of transformation
under way, is designed to create an environment conducive
at once to universal participation and to mutual support and
assistance. The nature of relationships among individuals in
this environment, all of whom consider themselves as treading
a common path of service, was explained briefly in our Rid.ván
message. We also indicated there that such an environment is
not without its effects on the administrative affairs of the Faith.
As an increasing number of believers participate in the teaching
and administrative work, undertaken with a humble attitude of
learning, they should come to view every task, every interaction,
as an occasion to join hands in the pursuit of progress and to
accompany one another in their efforts to serve the Cause. In
this way will the impulse to over instruct be quieted. In this way
will the tendency to reduce a complex process of transformation into simplistic steps, susceptible to instruction by manual,
be averted. Discrete actions are placed in context, and even
the smallest of steps is endowed with meaning. The operation
of spiritual forces in the arena of service becomes increasingly
apparent, and bonds of friendship, so vital to a healthy pattern
of growth, are continuously reinforced.
Within this landscape of unfolding processes, emerging
structures, and enduring fellowship, that moment which has
come to be known as the “launching” of an intensive program
of growth represents conscious recognition that all the elements
necessary to accelerate the expansion and consolidation of
99

16.8

16.9

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.10

16.11

the Faith are not only in place but also functioning with an
adequate degree of effectiveness. It signals the maturation of
an ever-expanding, self-sustaining system for the spiritual edification of a population: a steady stream of friends is proceeding
through the courses of the training institute and engaging in the
corresponding activities, which serves, in turn, to increase the
number of fresh recruits into the Faith, a significant percentage
of whom invariably enters the institute process, guaranteeing
the expansion of the system. This constitutes another milestone
that the friends laboring in every cluster must, in time, reach.
In reiterating here much of what we have stated on previous
occasions, we hope to have impressed upon you how readily
the movement of a population, inspired by the purpose and
principles of the Cause, can be nurtured, when not made the
object of extraneous complications. We have no illusion that
the path traced out so summarily above is devoid of difficulty.
Progress is achieved through the dialectic of crisis and victory,
and setbacks are inevitable. A drop in participation, a disruption in the cycles of activity, a momentary breach in the bonds
of unity—these are among the myriad challenges that may have
to be met. Not infrequently the rise in human resources, or the
ability to mobilize them, will fall short of the demands of rapid
expansion. Yet the imposition of formulas on the process will
not result in a pattern of growth characterized by the desired
equilibrium. Temporary imbalances in the progress of different
activities are intrinsic to the process, and they can be adjusted
over time, if dealt with patiently. Scaling back one activity that
is flourishing, on the basis of theoretical conceptions of how
balanced growth can be achieved, often proves counterproductive. While the friends in a cluster might well benefit from the
experience of those who have already established the necessary
pattern of action, it is only through continued action, reflection
and consultation on their part that they will learn to read their
own reality, see their own possibilities, make use of their own
resources, and respond to the exigencies of large-scale expansion and consolidation to come.
Today, there are some 1,600 clusters worldwide where
the friends have succeeded in creating the pattern of action
associated with an intensive program of growth. Though
significant, this accomplishment can by no means be considered
the culmination of the process that has gathered momentum
in each cluster. New frontiers of learning are now open to the
100

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

friends, who are asked to dedicate their energies to the creation
of vibrant communities, growing in size and reflecting in greater
and greater degrees Bahá’u’lláh’s vision for humanity. Such
clusters will also need to serve as reservoirs of potential pioneers that can be dispatched, largely across the home front, to
cluster after cluster, shedding in some the first rays of the light
of His Revelation and strengthening in others the presence of
the Faith, enabling all to progress quickly to the first milestone
along the path of development, or beyond. With this in mind,
we will call upon the community of the Most Great Name at
Rid.ván 2011 to raise over the next five years the total number
of clusters in which a program of growth is under way, at
whatever level of intensity, to 5,000, approximately one third
of all clusters in the world at present.

Advancing the frontiers of learning
What we have described in the preceding paragraphs and
in so many messages over the last decade and a half can best be
viewed as the latest in a series of approaches to the growth of
the Bahá’í community, each suited to specific historical circumstances. This divinely propelled process of growth was set in
motion by the fervor generated in the Cradle of the Faith more
than one hundred and sixty years ago, as thousands responded
to the summons of a New Day, and received impetus through
the exertions made by early believers to carry the message of
Bahá’u’lláh to neighboring countries in the East and scattered
pockets in the West. It acquired greater structure through the
Tablets of the Divine Plan revealed by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and gained
momentum as the friends spread out systematically across
the globe under the direction of the Guardian to establish
small centers of Bahá’í activity and erect the first pillars of the
Administrative Order. It gathered force in the rural areas of
the world as masses of humanity were moved to embrace the
Faith, but slowed considerably as the friends strove to discover
strategies for sustaining large-scale expansion and consolidation. And, for fifteen years now, it has been steadily accelerating
since we raised the call at the outset of the Four Year Plan for
the Bahá’í world to systematize the teaching work on the basis
of the experience it had gained through decades of difficult
but invaluable learning. That the current approach to growth,
effective as it is, must evolve still further in complexity and
sophistication once it has taken root in a cluster, demonstrating
101

16.12

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.13

16.14

ever more notably the “society-building power” inherent in the
Faith, few would fail to recognize.
Referring to the development of the global Bahá’í community, how often did the beloved Guardian encourage the
friends to remain resolute in their purpose and persevere in
their endeavors. “Conscious of their high calling, confident
in the society-building power which their Faith possesses,” he
noted with satisfaction, “they press forward, undeterred and
undismayed, in their efforts to fashion and perfect the necessary
instruments wherein the embryonic World Order of Bahá’u’lláh
can mature and develop.” “It is this building process, slow
and unobtrusive,” he reminded them, that “constitutes the
one hope” of a disillusioned humanity. That this process will
continue to gain in scope and influence and the Administrative
Order demonstrate in time “its capacity to be regarded not only
as the nucleus but the very pattern of the New World Order”
is clear from his writings. “In a world the structure of whose
political and social institutions is impaired, whose vision is
befogged, whose conscience is bewildered, whose religious
systems have become anaemic and lost their virtue,” he asserted
so emphatically, “this healing Agency, this leavening Power, this
cementing Force, intensely alive and all-pervasive,” is “taking
shape,” is “crystallizing into institutions,” and is “mobilizing
its forces.”
What should be apparent is that, if the Administrative
Order is to serve as a pattern for future society, then the
community within which it is developing must not only acquire
capacity to address increasingly complex material and spiritual
requirements but also become larger and larger in size. How
could it be otherwise. A small community, whose members are
united by their shared beliefs, characterized by their high ideals,
proficient in managing their affairs and tending to their needs,
and perhaps engaged in several humanitarian projects—a community such as this, prospering but at a comfortable distance
from the reality experienced by the masses of humanity, can
never hope to serve as a pattern for restructuring the whole of
society. That the worldwide Bahá’í community has managed
to avert the dangers of complacency is a source of abiding joy
to us. Indeed, the community has well in hand its expansion
and consolidation. Yet, to administer the affairs of teeming
numbers in villages and cities around the globe—to raise aloft

102

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

the standard of Bahá’u’lláh’s World Order for all to see—is still
a distant goal.
Therein, then, lies the challenge that must be faced by those
in the forefront of the learning process which will continue to
advance over the course of the next Plan. Wherever an intensive
program of growth is established, let the friends spare no effort
to increase the level of participation. Let them strain every
nerve to ensure that the system which they have so laboriously
erected does not close in on itself but progressively expands
to embrace more and more people. Let them not lose sight of
the remarkable receptivity they found—nay, the sense of eager
expectation that awaited them—as they gained confidence in
their ability to interact with people of all walks of life and
converse with them about the Person of Bahá’u’lláh and His
Revelation. Let them hold fast to the conviction that a direct
presentation of the Faith, when carried out at a sufficient level
of depth and reinforced by a sound approach to consolidation,
can bring enduring results. And let them not forget the lessons
of the past which left no doubt that a relatively small band
of active supporters of the Cause, no matter how resourceful,
no matter how consecrated, cannot attend to the needs of
communities comprising hundreds, much less thousands, of
men, women and children. The implications are clear enough.
If, in a cluster, those shouldering responsibility for expansion
and consolidation number in the tens, with a few hundred
participating in the activities of community life, both figures
should rise significantly so that by the end of the Plan, one or
two hundred are facilitating the participation of one or two
thousand.
It is heartening to see that, already in some 300 of the
1,600 clusters worldwide with intensive programs of growth in
operation, the believers have entered the new arena of learning
now open to them, and, in more than a few, they are extending
its frontiers. Clearly, in all such clusters, strengthening the educational processes set in motion by the training institute, each
with its own requisites—regularly held classes for the youngest
members of society, close-knit groups for junior youth, and
circles of study for youth and adults—is of paramount importance. Much of what this work entails was discussed in the
Rid.ván message. Without exception, having witnessed the transformative effects of the institute process firsthand, the friends
in such clusters are striving to gain a fuller appreciation of the
103

16.15

16.16

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

dynamics that underlie it—the spirit of fellowship it creates, the
participatory approach it adopts, the depth of understanding
it fosters, the acts of service it recommends, and, above all, its
reliance on the Word of God. Every effort is being exerted to
ensure that the process reflects the complementarity of “being”
and “doing” the institute courses make explicit; the centrality
they accord to knowledge and its application; the emphasis
they place on avoiding false dichotomies; the stress they lay on
memorization of the Creative Word; and the care they exercise
in raising consciousness, without awakening the insistent self.

Enhancing administrative capacity
16.17

16.18

Though the central elements of the process of growth
remain unchanged in the clusters in the vanguard of learning,
sheer numbers require organizational schemes to take on a
higher degree of complexity. Different innovations have already
been introduced, on the basis of both geographic considerations and numerical growth. The division of the cluster into
smaller units, the decentralization of the reflection meeting,
the assignment of assistants to institute coordinators, the
deployment in teams of experienced friends to support others
in the field—these are some of the arrangements that have
been made thus far. We have every confidence that, with your
able assistance, the International Teaching Centre will follow
these developments over the course of the next Plan, helping to
consolidate the lessons learned into well-proven methods and
instruments. To this end, you and your auxiliaries will need
to cultivate an atmosphere that encourages the friends to be
methodical but not rigid, creative but not haphazard, decisive
but not hasty, careful but not controlling, recognizing that,
in the final analysis, it is not technique but unity of thought,
consistent action, and dedication to learning which will bring
about progress.
Whatever the nature of the arrangements made at the
cluster level for coordinating large-scale activity, continued
progress will depend on the development of Local Spiritual
Assemblies and on the increased capacity of Regional Bahá’í
Councils and ultimately National Spiritual Assemblies. In the
Rid.ván message we expressed pleasure at noting the growing
strength of National Assemblies, and we look to the coming
five years with optimism, certain that we will see significant
leaps forward in this respect. Moreover, we have no doubt that,
104

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

in concert with National Assemblies, you will be able to help
Regional Councils enhance their institutional capacity. There
are currently 170 such administrative bodies in 45 countries
worldwide, and their number is sure to climb during the next
Plan. It will be imperative that all Regional Councils pay close
attention to the operation of the training institute and the functioning of Area Teaching Committees. With this in mind, they
will find it necessary to create and refine mechanisms that serve
to further the pattern of growth unfolding at the cluster level
and the learning process associated with it. These will include a
well-functioning regional office that provides the secretary with
basic organizational support; a sound system of accounting that
accommodates divers channels for the flow of funds to and
from clusters; an efficient means of communication that takes
into consideration the reality of life in villages and neighborhoods; and, where warranted, physical structures that facilitate
intensified and focused activity. What is important to acknow­
ledge in this respect is that only if the Councils themselves are
engaged in a process of learning will such mechanisms prove
to be effective. Otherwise, while ostensibly created to support
learning in action by an increasing number of participants in
neighborhoods and villages, systems being developed may well
work against it in subtle ways, stifling, unintentionally, rising
aspirations at the grass roots.
While collaboration with National Spiritual Assemblies
and Regional Councils will be one of your primary concerns,
your auxiliaries will need to direct more and more of their
energies towards fostering institutional capacity at the local
level, where the demands of community building assert themselves so unmistakably. To help you envision what lies ahead
of Auxiliary Board members and their assistants everywhere,
particularly in clusters experiencing large-scale expansion and
consolidation, we ask you to reflect, first, on the development
of Local Spiritual Assemblies in the many rural areas of the
world, in which the vast majority of such clusters today are to
be found.
As you are aware, often in a rural cluster made up of
villages and perhaps one or two towns, while the pattern of
action associated with an intensive program of growth is being
established, the efforts of the friends are confined to a few
localities. Once in place, however, the pattern can be extended
quickly to village after village, as explained in our Rid.ván
105

16.19

16.20

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.21

16.22

message this year. Early on in each locality, the Local Spiritual
Assembly comes into existence, and its steady development
follows a trajectory parallel with, and intimately tied to, the
fledgling process of growth unfolding in the village. And not
unlike the evolution of other facets of this process, the development of the Local Assembly can best be understood in terms
of capacity building.
What needs to occur in the first instance is relatively
straightforward: Individual awareness of the process of growth
gathering momentum in the village, born of each member’s
personal involvement in the core activities, must coalesce into
a collective consciousness that recognizes both the nature of the
transformation under way and the obligation of the Assembly
to foster it. Without doubt, some attention will have to be
given to certain basic administrative functions—for example,
meeting with a degree of regularity, conducting the Nineteen
Day Feast and planning Holy Day observances, establishing
a local fund, and holding annual elections in accordance with
Bahá’í principle. However, it should not prove difficult for
the Local Assembly to begin, concomitant with such efforts
and with encouragement from an assistant to an Auxiliary
Board member, to consult as a body on one or two specific
issues with immediate relevance to the life of the community:
how the devotional character of the village is being enhanced
through the efforts of individuals who have completed the first
institute course; how the spiritual education of the children
is being addressed by teachers raised up by the institute; how
the potential of junior youth is being realized by the program
for their spiritual empowerment; how the spiritual and social
fabric of the community is being strengthened as the friends
visit one another in their homes. As the Assembly consults
on such tangible matters and learns to nurture the process
of growth lovingly and patiently, its relationship with the
Area Teaching Committee and the training institute gradually
becomes cemented in a common purpose. But, of still greater
importance, it will begin to lay the foundations on which can
be built that uniquely affectionate and genuinely supportive
relationship, described by the beloved Guardian in many of his
messages, which Local Spiritual Assemblies should establish
with the individual believer.
Clearly, learning to consult on specific issues related to
the global Plan, no matter how crucial, represents but one
106

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

dimension of the capacity-building process in which the Local
Spiritual Assembly must engage. Its continued development
implies adherence to the injunction laid down by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
that “discussions must all be confined to spiritual matters that
pertain to the training of souls, the instruction of children,
the relief of the poor, the help of the feeble throughout all
classes in the world, kindness to all peoples, the diffusion of
the fragrances of God and the exaltation of His Holy Word.”
Its steady advancement requires an unbending commitment to
promote the best interests of the community and a vigilance
in guarding the process of growth against the forces of moral
decay that threaten to arrest it. Its ongoing progress calls for a
sense of responsibility that extends beyond the circle of friends
and families engaged in the core activities to encompass the
entire population of the village. And sustaining its gradual
maturation is unshakable faith in ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s assurance that
He will enfold every Spiritual Assembly within the embrace of
His care and protection.
Associated with this rise in collective consciousness is the
Assembly’s growing ability to properly assess and utilize resources, financial and otherwise, both in support of community
activities and in discharging its administrative functions, which
may in time include the judicious appointment of committees
and the maintenance of modest physical facilities for its operations. No less vital is its ability to nurture an environment
conducive to the participation of large numbers in unified
action and to ensure that their energies and talents contribute
towards progress. In all these respects, the spiritual well-being
of the community remains uppermost in the Assembly’s mind.
And when inevitable problems arise, whether in relation to
some activity or among individuals, they will be addressed by
a Local Spiritual Assembly which has so completely gained the
confidence of the members of the community that all naturally
turn to it for assistance. This implies that the Assembly has
learned through experience how to help the believers put aside
the divisive ways of a partisan mindset, how to find the seeds
of unity in even the most perplexing and thorny situations and
how to nurture them slowly and lovingly, upholding at all times
the standard of justice.
As the community grows in size and in capacity to maintain
vitality, the friends will, we have indicated in the past, be
drawn further into the life of society and be challenged to take
107

16.23

16.24

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.25

16.26

advantage of the approaches they have developed to respond to
a widening range of issues that face their village. The question
of coherence, so essential to the growth achieved thus far, and
so fundamental to the Plan’s evolving framework for action,
now assumes new dimensions. Much will fall on the Local
Assembly, not as an executor of projects but as the voice of
moral authority, to make certain that, as the friends strive to
apply the teachings of the Faith to improve conditions through
a process of action, reflection and consultation, the integrity of
their endeavors is not compromised.
Our Rid.ván message described a few of the characteristics of
social action at the grass roots, and the conditions it must meet.
Efforts in a village will generally begin on a small scale, perhaps
with the emergence of groups of friends, each concerned with
a specific social or economic need it has identified and each
pursuing a simple set of appropriate actions. Consultation
at the Nineteen Day Feast creates a space for the growing
social consciousness of the community to find constructive
expression. Whatever the nature of activities undertaken, the
Local Assembly must be attentive to potential pitfalls and help
the friends, if necessary, to steer past them—the allurements
of overly ambitious projects that would consume energies and
ultimately prove untenable, the temptation of financial grants
that would necessitate a departure from Bahá’í principle, the
promises of technologies deceptively packaged that would strip
the village of its cultural heritage and lead to fragmentation
and dissonance. Eventually the strength of the institute process
in the village, and the enhanced capabilities it has fostered in
individuals, may enable the friends to take advantage of methods and programs of proven effectiveness, which have been
developed by one or another Bahá’í-inspired organization and
which have been introduced into the cluster at the suggestion
of, and with support from, our Office of Social and Economic
Development. Moreover, the Assembly must learn to interact
with social and political structures in the locality, gradually
raising consciousness of the presence of the Faith and the
influence it is exerting on the progress of the village.
What is outlined in the foregoing paragraphs represents
only a few of the attributes which Local Spiritual Assemblies in
the many villages of the world will gradually develop in serving
the needs of communities that embrace larger and larger numbers. As they increasingly manifest their latent capacities and
108

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

powers, their members will come to be seen by the inhabitants
of each village as “the trusted ones of the Merciful among men.”
Thus will these Assemblies become “shining lamps and heavenly gardens, from which the fragrances of holiness are diffused
over all regions, and the lights of knowledge are shed abroad
over all created things. From them the spirit of life streameth
in every direction.”
Such a lofty vision applies equally, of course, to all Local
Spiritual Assemblies throughout the world. Even in a major
metropolitan area, the nature of an Assembly’s development is
fundamentally the same as the one delineated above. Differences
lie principally in size and diversity of the population. The first
necessitates the division of the Assembly’s area of jurisdiction
into neighborhoods according to the exigencies of growth and
the gradual introduction of mechanisms for administering the
affairs of the Faith in each. The second requires the Assembly
to become familiar with the myriad social spaces, beyond
geographic ones, in which segments of the population come
together and to offer them, to the extent possible, the wisdom
enshrined in the teachings. Further, the institutional structures
in an urban area—social, political, and cultural—with which
the Assembly must learn to engage are much wider in range
and larger in number.

16.27

Service on Bahá’í institutions
In setting out for you in these pages developments we are
eager to see in the administrative work of the Faith during the
next Five Year Plan, we are reminded of the repeated warnings
raised by the Guardian in this regard. “Let us take heed lest
in our great concern for the perfection of the administrative
machinery of the Cause,” he stated, “we lose sight of the Divine
Purpose for which it has been created.” The Bahá’í administrative machinery, he reiterated again and again, “is to be regarded
as a means, and not an end in itself.” It is intended, he made
clear, “to serve a twofold purpose.” On the one hand, “it should
aim at a steady and gradual expansion” of the Cause “along
lines that are at once broad, sound and universal.” On the
other, “it should ensure the internal consolidation of the work
already achieved.” And he went on to explain: “It should both
provide the impulse whereby the dynamic forces latent in the
Faith can unfold, crystallize, and shape the lives and conduct
of men, and serve as a medium for the interchange of thought
109

16.28

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.29

16.30

and the coordination of activities among the divers elements
that constitute the Bahá’í community.”
It is our earnest hope that, in your efforts over the next Plan
to promote the sound and harmonious development of Bahá’í
administration at all levels, from the local to the national, you
will do your utmost to help the friends carry out their functions
in the context of the organic process of growth gathering
momentum across the globe. The realization of this hope will
hinge, to a large extent, on the degree to which those who have
been called upon to render such service—whether elected to a
Spiritual Assembly or named to one of its agencies, whether
designated an institute coordinator or appointed one of your
deputies—recognize the great privilege that is theirs and understand the boundaries which this privilege establishes for them.
Service on the institutions and agencies of the Faith is
indeed a tremendous privilege, but not one that is sought by
the individual; it is a duty and responsibility to which he or she
may be called at any given time. It is understandable, of course,
that all those involved in Bahá’í administration would rightly
feel they have been invested with a singular honor in forming
part, in whatever way, of a structure designed to be a channel
through which the spirit of the Cause flows. Yet they should
not imagine that such service entitles them to operate on the
periphery of the learning process that is everywhere gaining
strength, exempt from its inherent requirements. Nor should
it be supposed that membership on administrative bodies
provides an opportunity to promote one’s own understanding
of what is recorded in the Sacred Text and how the teachings
should be applied, steering the community in whatever
direction personal preferences dictate. Referring to members
of Spiritual Assemblies, the Guardian wrote that they “must
disregard utterly their own likes and dislikes, their personal
interests and inclinations, and concentrate their minds upon
those measures that will conduce to the welfare and happiness
of the Bahá’í Community and promote the common weal.”
Bahá’í institutions do exercise authority to guide the friends,
and exert moral, spiritual and intellectual influence on the
lives of individuals and communities. However, such functions
are to be performed with the realization that an ethos of
loving service pervades Bahá’í institutional identity. Qualifying
authority and influence in this manner implies sacrifice on the
part of those entrusted to administer the affairs of the Faith.
110

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Does not ‘Abdu’l-Bahá tell us that “when a lump of iron is cast
into the forge, its ferrous qualities of blackness, coldness and
solidity, which symbolize the attributes of the human world, are
concealed and disappear, while the fire’s distinctive qualities of
redness, heat and fluidity, which symbolize the virtues of the
Kingdom, become visibly apparent in it.” As He averred, “ye
must in this matter—that is, the serving of humankind—lay
down your very lives, and as ye yield yourselves, rejoice.”
***
Dearly loved friends: As you well know, we take great
pleasure in witnessing how ably you and your auxiliaries,
serving in the forefront of the teaching field, are carrying out
your duties to nurture in every heart and soul the fire of the
love of God, to promote learning, and to assist all in their
endeavors to develop an upright and praiseworthy character.
When the North American Bahá’í community embarked on
its first Seven Year Plan, in pursuit of the responsibilities with
which it had been charged in the Tablets of the Divine Plan,
the Guardian addressed to the friends in that land a letter of
considerable length and great potency, dated 25 December
1938, subsequently published under the title The Advent of
Divine Justice. Elaborating on the nature of the tasks at hand,
the letter made reference to what the Guardian described as
spiritual prerequisites for the success of all Bahá’í undertakings.
Of these, three, he indicated, “stand out as preeminent and
vital”: rectitude of conduct, a chaste and holy life, and freedom
from prejudice. Given the conditions of the world today, you
would do well to reflect on the implications of his observations
for the global effort of the Bahá’í community to infuse cluster
after cluster with the spirit of Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation.
Referring to rectitude of conduct, Shoghi Effendi spoke
of the “justice, equity, truthfulness, honesty, fair-mindedness,
reliability, and trustworthiness” that must “distinguish every
phase of the life of the Bahá’í community.” Though applicable
to all its members, this requisite was directed principally, he
underscored, to its “elected representatives, whether local,
regional, or national,” whose sense of moral rectitude should
stand in clear contrast to “the demoralizing influences which
a corruption-ridden political life so strikingly manifests.” The
Guardian called for “an abiding sense of undeviating justice”
in a “strangely disordered world” and quoted extensively from
111

16.31

16.32

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.33

the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, setting the sights
of the friends on the highest standards of honesty and trustworthiness. He appealed to the believers to exemplify rectitude of
conduct in every aspect of their lives—in their business dealings,
in their domestic lives, in all manner of employment, in every
service they render to the Cause and to their people—and to
observe its requirements in their uncompromising adherence
to the laws and principles of the Faith. That political life
everywhere has continued to deteriorate at an alarming rate in
the intervening years, as the very conception of statesmanship
has been drained of meaning, as policies have come to serve
the economic interests of the few in the name of progress, as
hypocrisy has been allowed to undermine the operation of
social and economic structures, is evident. If indeed great effort
was required for the friends to uphold the high standards of the
Faith then, how much greater must be the exertion in a world
that rewards dishonesty, that encourages corruption, and that
treats truth as a negotiable commodity. Profound is the confusion that threatens the foundations of society, and unwavering
must be the resolve of all those involved in Bahá’í activity, lest
the slightest trace of self-interest becloud their judgment. Let
the coordinators of every training institute, the members of
every Area Teaching Committee, every Auxiliary Board member
and every one of his or her assistants, and all members of every
local, regional and national Bahá’í body, whether elected or
appointed, appreciate the significance of the Guardian’s plea to
ponder in their hearts the implications of the moral rectitude
which he described with such clarity. May their actions serve
as a reminder to a beleaguered and weary humanity of its high
destiny and its inherent nobility.
No less pertinent to the success of the Bahá’í enterprise today are the Guardian’s forthright comments on the importance
of a chaste and holy life, “with its implications of modesty,
purity, temperance, decency, and clean-mindedness.” He was
unequivocal in his language, summoning the friends to a life
unsullied “by the indecencies, the vices, the false standards,
which an inherently deficient moral code tolerates, perpetuates,
and fosters.” We need not provide for you here evidence of the
influence that such a deficient code now exerts on humanity as
a whole; even the remotest spots on the globe are captivated by
its enticements. Yet we feel compelled to mention a few points
related specifically to the theme of purity. The forces at work
112

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

on the hearts and minds of the young, to whom the Guardian
directed his appeal most fervently, are pernicious indeed.
Exhortations to remain pure and chaste will only succeed to
a limited degree in helping them to resist these forces. What
needs to be appreciated in this respect is the extent to which
young minds are affected by the choices parents make for their
own lives, when, no matter how unintentionally, no matter how
innocently, such choices condone the passions of the world—its
admiration for power, its adoration of status, its love of luxuries,
its attachment to frivolous pursuits, its glorification of violence,
and its obsession with self-gratification. It must be realized that
the isolation and despair from which so many suffer are products of an environment ruled by an all-pervasive materialism.
And in this the friends must understand the ramifications of
Bahá’u’lláh’s statement that “the present-day order” must “be
rolled up, and a new one spread out in its stead.” Throughout
the world today, young people are among the most enthusiastic
supporters of the Plan and the most ardent champions of the
Cause; their numbers will, we are certain, increase from year
to year. May every one of them come to know the bounties of a
life adorned with purity and learn to draw on the powers that
flow through pure channels.
The Guardian next addressed the subject of prejudice,
stating patently that “any division or cleavage” in the ranks of
the Faith “is alien to its very purpose, principles, and ideals.” He
made clear that the friends should manifest “complete freedom
from prejudice in their dealings with peoples of a different
race, class, creed, or color.” He went on to discuss at length the
specific question of racial prejudice, “the corrosion of which,”
he indicated, had “bitten into the fibre, and attacked the whole
social structure of American society” and which, he asserted
at the time, “should be regarded as constituting the most vital
and challenging issue confronting the Bahá’í community at the
present stage of its evolution.” Independent of the strengths
and weaknesses of the measures taken by the American nation,
and the Bahá’í community evolving within it, in addressing
this particular challenge, the fact remains that prejudices of
all kinds—of race, of class, of ethnicity, of gender, of religious
belief—continue to hold a strong grip on humanity. While it is
true that, at the level of public discourse, great strides have been
taken in refuting the falsehoods that give rise to prejudice in
whatever form, it still permeates the structures of society and
113

16.34

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.35

is systematically impressed on the individual consciousness. It
should be apparent to all that the process set in motion by the
current series of global Plans seeks, in the approaches it takes
and the methods it employs, to build capacity in every human
group, with no regard for class or religious background, with
no concern for ethnicity or race, irrespective of gender or social
status, to arise and contribute to the advancement of civilization. We pray that, as it steadily unfolds, its potential to disable
every instrument devised by humanity over the long period of
its childhood for one group to oppress another may be realized.
The educational process associated with the training institute is, of course, helping to foster the spiritual conditions to
which the Guardian referred in The Advent of Divine Justice,
along with the many others mentioned in the writings that must
distinguish the life of the Bahá’í community—the spirit of unity
that must animate the friends, the ties of love that must bind
them, the firmness in the Covenant that must sustain them, and
the reliance and trust they must place on the power of divine
assistance, to note but a few. That such essential attributes are
developed in the context of building capacity for service, in an
environment that cultivates systematic action, is particularly
noteworthy. In promoting this environment, the Auxiliary
Board members and their assistants need to recognize the importance of two fundamental, interlocking precepts: On the one
hand, the high standard of conduct inculcated by Bahá’u’lláh’s
Revelation can admit no compromise; it can, in no wise, be
lowered, and all must fix their gaze on its lofty heights. On the
other, it must be acknowledged that, as human beings, we are
far from perfect; what is expected of everyone is sincere daily
effort. Self-righteousness is to be eschewed.
***

16.36

Apart from the spiritual requisites of a sanctified Bahá’í life,
there are habits of thought that affect the unfoldment of the
global Plan, and their development has to be encouraged at the
level of culture. There are tendencies, as well, that need to be
gradually overcome. Many of these tendencies are reinforced by
approaches prevalent in society at large, which, not altogether
unreasonably, enter into Bahá’í activity. The magnitude of the
challenge facing the friends in this respect is not lost on us. They
are called upon to become increasingly involved in the life of
society, benefiting from its educational programs, excelling in
114

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

its trades and professions, learning to employ well its tools, and
applying themselves to the advancement of its arts and sciences.
At the same time, they are never to lose sight of the aim of
the Faith to effect a transformation of society, remolding its
institutions and processes, on a scale never before witnessed. To
this end, they must remain acutely aware of the inadequacies of
current modes of thinking and doing—this, without feeling the
least degree of superiority, without assuming an air of secrecy
or aloofness, and without adopting an unnecessarily critical
stance towards society. There are a few specific points we wish
to mention in this connection.
It is heartening to note that the friends are approaching the
study of the messages of the Universal House of Justice related
to the Plan with such diligence. The level of discussion generated as they strive to put into practice the guidance received,
and to learn from experience, is impressive. We cannot help
noticing, however, that achievements tend to be more enduring
in those regions where the friends strive to understand the
totality of the vision conveyed in the messages, while difficulties
often arise when phrases and sentences are taken out of context
and viewed as isolated fragments. The institutions and agencies
of the Faith should help the believers to analyze but not reduce,
to ponder meaning but not dwell on words, to identify distinct
areas of action but not compartmentalize. We realize that this
is no small task. Society speaks more and more in slogans. We
hope that the habits the friends are forming in study circles to
work with full and complex thoughts and to achieve understanding will be extended to various spheres of activity.
Closely related to the habit of reducing an entire theme
into one or two appealing phrases is the tendency to perceive
dichotomies, where, in fact, there are none. It is essential
that ideas forming part of a cohesive whole not be held in
opposition to one another. In a letter written on his behalf,
Shoghi Effendi warned: “We must take the teachings as a great,
balanced whole, not seek out and oppose to each other two
strong statements that have different meanings; somewhere in
between, there are links uniting the two.” How encouraged we
have been to note that many of the misunderstandings of the
past have fallen away as appreciation for the provisions of the
Plan has grown. Expansion and consolidation, individual action
and collective campaigns, refinement of the inner character and
consecration to selfless service—the harmonious relationship
115

16.37

16.38

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.39

16.40

between these facets of Bahá’í life is now readily acknowledged.
It brings us equal pleasure to know that the friends are on their
guard, lest new false dichotomies be allowed to pervade their
thinking. They are well aware that the diverse elements of a
program of growth are complementary. The tendency to see
activities, and the agencies that support them, in competition
with one another, a tendency so common in society at large, is
being avoided by the community.
Finally, a significant advance in culture, one which we
have followed with particular interest, is marked by the rise
in capacity to think in terms of process. That, from the outset,
the believers have been asked to be ever conscious of the broad
processes that define their work is apparent from a careful
reading of even the earliest communications of the Guardian
related to the first national plans of the Faith. However, in a
world focused increasingly on the promotion of events, or at
best projects, with a mindset that derives satisfaction from the
sense of expectation and excitement they generate, maintaining
the level of dedication required for long-term action demands
considerable effort. The expansion and consolidation of the
Bahá’í community encompasses a number of interacting
processes, each of which contributes its share to the movement
of humanity towards Bahá’u’lláh’s vision of a new World
Order. The lines of action associated with any given process
provide for the organization of occasional events, and from
time to time, activities take the shape of a project with a clear
beginning and a definite end. If, however, events are imposed on
the natural unfoldment of a process, they will disrupt its sound
evolution. If the projects undertaken in a cluster are not made
subordinate to the explicit needs of the processes unfolding
there, they will yield little fruit.
To understand the nature of the interacting processes that,
in their totality, engender the expansion and consolidation of
the Faith is vital to the successful execution of the Plan. In your
efforts to further such understanding, you and your auxiliaries
are encouraged to bear in mind a concept that lies at the foundation of the current global enterprise and, indeed, at the very
heart of every stage of the Divine Plan, namely, that progress
is achieved through the development of three participants—the
individual, the institutions, and the community. Throughout
human history, interactions among these three have been
fraught with difficulties at every turn, with the individual
116

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

clamoring for freedom, the institution demanding submission,
and the community claiming precedence. Every society has
defined, in one way or another, the relationships that bind
the three, giving rise to periods of stability, interwoven with
turmoil. Today, in this age of transition, as humanity struggles
to attain its collective maturity, such relationships—nay, the
very conception of the individual, of social institutions, and
of the community—continue to be assailed by crises too
numerous to count. The worldwide crisis of authority provides
proof enough. So grievous have been its abuses, and so deep
the suspicion and resentment it now arouses, that the world is
becoming increasingly ungovernable—a situation made all the
more perilous by the weakening of community ties.
Every follower of Bahá’u’lláh knows well that the purpose
of His Revelation is to bring into being a new creation. No sooner had “the First Call gone forth from His lips than the whole
creation was revolutionized, and all that are in the heavens and
all that are on earth were stirred to the depths.” The individual,
the institutions, and the community—the three protagonists in
the Divine Plan—are being shaped under the direct influence of
His Revelation, and a new conception of each, appropriate for
a humanity that has come of age, is emerging. The relationships
that bind them, too, are undergoing a profound transformation,
bringing into the realm of existence civilization-building powers
which can only be released through conformity with His decree.
At a fundamental level these relationships are characterized by
cooperation and reciprocity, manifestations of the interconnectedness that governs the universe. So it is that the individual,
with no regard for “personal benefits and selfish advantages,”
comes to see him- or herself as “one of the servants of God, the
All-Possessing,” whose only desire is to carry out His laws. So it
is that the friends come to recognize that “wealth of sentiment,
abundance of goodwill and effort” are of little avail when their
flow is not directed along proper channels, that “the unfettered
freedom of the individual should be tempered with mutual
consultation and sacrifice,” and that “the spirit of initiative and
enterprise should be reinforced by a deeper realization of the
supreme necessity for concerted action and a fuller devotion to
the common weal.” And so it is that all come to discern with
ease those areas of activity in which the individual can best
exercise initiative and those which fall to the institutions alone.
“With heart and soul,” the friends follow the directives of their
117

16.41

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

16.42

16.43

16.44

institutions, so that, as ‘Abdu’l-Bahá explains, “things may be
properly ordered and well arranged.” This, of course, is not a
blind obedience; it is an obedience that marks the emergence of
a mature human race which grasps the implications of a system
as far-reaching as Bahá’u’lláh’s new World Order.
And those who are called upon from among the ranks of
such enkindled souls to serve on the institutions of that mighty
system understand well the Guardian’s words that “their function is not to dictate, but to consult, and consult not only among
themselves, but as much as possible with the friends whom they
represent.” “Never” would they be “led to suppose that they are
the central ornaments of the body of the Cause, intrinsically
superior to others in capacity or merit, and sole promoters of
its teachings and principles.” “With extreme humility,” they
approach their tasks and “endeavor, by their open-mindedness,
their high sense of justice and duty, their candor, their modesty,
their entire devotion to the welfare and interests of the friends,
the Cause, and humanity, to win, not only the confidence and
the genuine support and respect of those whom they serve, but
also their esteem and real affection.” Within the environment
thus created, institutions invested with authority see themselves
as instruments for nurturing human potential, ensuring its
unfoldment along avenues productive and meritorious.
Composed of such individuals and such institutions, the
community of the Greatest Name becomes that spiritually
charged arena in which powers are multiplied in unified action.
It is of this community that ‘Abdu’l-Bahá writes: “When any
souls grow to be true believers, they will attain a spiritual
relationship with one another, and show forth a tenderness
which is not of this world. They will, all of them, become
elated from a draught of divine love, and that union of theirs,
that connection, will also abide forever. Souls, that is, who will
consign their own selves to oblivion, strip from themselves the
defects of humankind, and unchain themselves from human
bondage, will beyond any doubt be illumined with the heavenly
splendors of oneness, and will all attain unto real union in the
world that dieth not.”
As more and more receptive souls embrace the Cause of
God and throw in their lot with those already participating in
the global enterprise under way, the development and activity
of the individual, the institutions, and the community are sure
to receive a mighty thrust forward. May a bewildered humanity
118

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

see in the relationships being forged among these three protagonists by the followers of Bahá’u’lláh a pattern of collective life
that will propel it towards its high destiny. This is our ardent
prayer in the Holy Shrines.
The Universal House of Justice

119

17
1 January 2011
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
For the past five days, the Continental Counsellors have
been gathered in conference in the Holy Land, engaged in
earnest deliberation at once insightful and clear visioned, well
grounded and confident, on the progress of the Divine Plan.
The joy and wonder of this gathering, now entering its closing
moments, has come from the vivid retelling of your numerous
exploits, deeds which secured the astonishing attainment of the
goal of the Five Year Plan one year early. It is hard to express
in words how much love for you has been shown in these few,
fleeting days. We praise God that He has raised up a community
so accomplished and render thanks to Him for releasing your
marvelous potentialities. You it is who, whether in collective
endeavors or individual efforts, are presenting the verities of
the Faith and assisting souls to recognize the Blessed Beauty.
You it is who, in your tens of thousands, are serving as tutors
of study circles wherever receptivity is kindled. You it is who,
without thought of self, are providing spiritual education to the
child and kindly fellowship to the junior youth. You it is who,
through visits to homes and invitations to yours, are forging
ties of spiritual kinship that foster a sense of community. You
it is who, when called to serve on the institutions and agencies
of the Cause, are accompanying others and rejoicing in their
achievements. And it is all of us, whatever our share in this
undertaking, who labor and long, strive and supplicate for the
transformation of humanity, envisioned by Bahá’u’lláh, to be
hastened.
A new five-year horizon now beckons, rich with portent.
The features of the Plan that will begin this Rid.ván are set
out in a letter we addressed to the Counsellors’ Conference
at its opening session and which was transmitted to National
121

17.1

17.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

Spiritual Assemblies the same day. We hope that you will
be able to give it thoughtful study, alongside the message
we addressed to you at Rid .ván 2010, at gatherings of all
kinds—whether at the national, regional, or cluster level, in
local communities, in neighborhoods and villages, or in the
home. We are certain that, through the consultations about the
Plan in which you participate, your understanding will deepen
and, conscious of the spiritual forces that support you, you will
resolve to make this global enterprise a personal concern and
become as occupied with the well-being of the human family as
you are with that of your dearest kin. It brings us great joy that
so many souls throughout the Bahá’í community are ready to
thus distinguish themselves. But what gratifies us beyond this
is the certain knowledge that victories will be won in the next
five years by youth and adults, men and women, who may at
present be wholly unaware of Bahá’u’lláh’s coming, much less
acquainted with the “society-building power” of His Faith. For
you possess a potent instrument for spiritually empowering
the masses of humanity to take charge of their own destiny, an
instrument tempered in the crucible of experience. You know
well, and have heard clearly, the call of Bahá’u’lláh: “I am the
Sun of Wisdom and the Ocean of Knowledge. I cheer the faint
and revive the dead. I am the guiding Light that illumineth
the way. I am the royal Falcon on the arm of the Almighty. I
unfold the drooping wings of every broken bird and start it on
its flight.”
Our abiding prayers are with each of you.
The Universal House of Justice

122

18
Rid.ván 2011
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
At the opening of this glorious season our eyes are brightened as we behold the newly unveiled brilliance of the gilded
dome that crowns the exalted Shrine of the Báb. Restored to the
supernal lustre intended for it by Shoghi Effendi, that august
edifice once again shines out to land, sea, and sky, by day and
by night, attesting the majesty and holiness of Him Whose
hallowed remains are embosomed within.
This moment of joy synchronizes with the close of an
auspicious chapter in the unfoldment of the Divine Plan. Only a
single decade remains of the first century of the Formative Age,
the first hundred years to be spent beneath the benevolent shade
of the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. The Five Year Plan
now ending is succeeded by another, the features of which have
already been made the object of intense study across the Bahá’í
world. Indeed, we could not be more gratified by the response
to our message to the Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors and to the Rid.ván message of twelve months ago.
Not satisfied with a fragmentary grasp of their contents, the
friends are returning to these messages again and again, singly
and in groups, at formal meetings and spontaneous gatherings.
Their understanding is enriched through active and informed
participation in the programs of growth being nurtured in their
clusters. Consequently, the Bahá’í community worldwide has
consciously absorbed in a few months what it needs to propel
it into a confident start to the coming decade.
Over the same period, cumulative instances of political
upheaval and economic turmoil on various continents have
shaken governments and peoples. Societies have been brought
to the brink of revolution, and in notable cases over the edge.
Leaders are finding that neither arms nor riches guarantee
123

18.1

18.2

18.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

18.4

18.5

security. Where the aspirations of the people have gone unfulfilled, a store of indignation has accrued. We recall how
pointedly Bahá’u’lláh admonished the rulers of the earth:
“Your people are your treasures. Beware lest your rule violate
the commandments of God, and ye deliver your wards to
the hands of the robber.” A word of caution: No matter how
captivating the spectacle of the people’s fervor for change, it
must be remembered that there are interests which manipulate
the course of events. And, so long as the remedy prescribed by
the Divine Physician is not administered, the tribulations of this
age will persist and deepen. An attentive observer of the times
will readily recognize the accelerated disintegration, fitful but
relentless, of a world order lamentably defective.
Yet, discernible too is its counterpart, the constructive
process that the Guardian associated with “the nascent Faith
of Bahá’u’lláh” and described as “the harbinger of the New
World Order that Faith must erelong establish.” Its indirect
effects can be seen in the outpouring of feeling, especially from
the young, that springs from a longing to contribute to societal
development. It is a bounty accorded to the followers of the
Ancient Beauty that this longing, which wells up inexorably
from the human spirit in every land, is able to find such eloquent expression in the work the Bahá’í community is carrying
out to build capacity for effective action amongst the diverse
populations of the planet. Can any privilege compare with this?
For insight into this work let every believer look to ‘Abdu’lBahá, the centenary of Whose “epoch-making journeys” to
Egypt and the West is being marked at this time. Tirelessly,
He expounded the teachings in every social space: in homes
and mission halls, churches and synagogues, parks and public
squares, railway carriages and ocean liners, clubs and societies,
schools and universities. Uncompromising in defense of the
truth, yet infinitely gentle in manner, He brought the universal
divine principles to bear on the exigencies of the age. To all
without distinction—officials, scientists, workers, children,
parents, exiles, activists, clerics, skeptics—He imparted love,
wisdom, comfort, whatever the particular need. While elevating
their souls, He challenged their assumptions, reoriented their
perspectives, expanded their consciousness, and focused their
energies. He demonstrated by word and deed such compassion
and generosity that hearts were utterly transformed. No one
was turned away. Our great hope is that frequent recollection,
124

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

during this centennial period, of the Master’s matchless record
will inspire and fortify His sincere admirers. Set His example
before your eyes and fix your gaze upon it; let it be your
instinctive guide in your pursuit of the aim of the Plan.
At the inception of the Bahá’í community’s first global Plan,
Shoghi Effendi described in compelling language the successive
stages by which the divine light had been kindled in the SíyáhChál, clothed in the lamp of revelation in Baghdád, spread
to countries in Asia and Africa even as it shone with added
brilliancy in Adrianople and later in ‘Akká, projected across
the seas to the remaining continents, and by which it would
be progressively diffused over the states and dependencies of
the world. The final part of this process he characterized as the
“penetration of that light … into all the remaining territories
of the globe,” referring to it as “the stage at which the light of
God’s triumphant Faith shining in all its power and glory will
have suffused and enveloped the entire planet.” Though that
goal is far from being fulfilled, the light already blazes intensely
in many a region. In some countries it shines in every cluster.
In the land where that inextinguishable light was first ignited,
it burns bright despite those who would snuff it out. In diverse
nations it achieves a steady glow across whole neighborhoods
and villages, as candle after candle in heart after heart is lighted
by the Hand of Providence; it illuminates thoughtful conversation at every level of human interaction; it casts its beams
upon a myriad initiatives taken to promote the well-being of a
people. And in every instance it radiates from a faithful believer,
a vibrant community, a loving Spiritual Assembly—each a
beacon of light against the gloom.
We pray earnestly at the Sacred Threshold that each one of
you, bearers of the undying flame, may be surrounded by the
potent confirmations of Bahá’u’lláh as you convey to others the
spark of faith.
The Universal House of Justice

125

18.6

18.7

19
23 May 2011
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
Our message dated 28 December 2010 to the Conference
of the Continental Boards of Counsellors briefly described the
process of growth which begins to unfold in a cluster, frequently as the result of a single homefront pioneer entering into
meaningful conversation with local residents. We also indicated
that more advanced clusters, in which the pattern of action
associated with an intensive program of growth has been firmly
established, will often serve as reservoirs of pioneers who can be
dispatched to other clusters, especially on the home front—in
some to initiate a systematic approach to sharing Bahá’u’lláh’s
teachings and in others to strengthen the processes of expansion
and consolidation that have already been established. There is
no doubt that the movement of pioneers remains an indispensable feature of the spiritual enterprise in which the community
of the Most Great Name is engaged.
During the Five Year Plan recently concluded, over 3,500
international pioneers entered the arena of service to reinforce
the work of the Faith in myriad ways across the globe. At
the same time, we were most pleased to see a surge in the
movement of homefront pioneers, their numbers matching
those who arose to serve in the international field and their
sacrificial efforts making a distinctive contribution to the early
attainment of the goal of the Plan. In the next five years, the
successful prosecution of the Plan will require the services of
several thousand consecrated souls who, spurred on by their
love for the Blessed Beauty, will forsake their homes to settle in
villages, towns and cities in order to raise to 5,000 the number
of clusters with programs of growth.
National Spiritual Assemblies, in close collaboration
with Continental Counsellors and Continental Pioneering
127

19.1

19.2

19.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

19.4

Committees, will continue to play a crucial role in expanding
the awareness of the believers about the critical needs of the
Cause and in assisting with the settlement of pioneers in designated clusters. They will not, however, be asked to establish
numerical goals at the outset, as was the practice in the past, for
those to be dispatched beyond their borders during the coming
five years. Rather, we will regularly call the attention of selected
National Assemblies in different parts of the world to specific
urgent pioneer needs, identified by the International Teaching
Centre in the course of its ongoing endeavors to follow the
progress of the Faith around the globe. It is hoped that National
Assemblies will then be able to quickly send pioneers who
respond to that particular appeal. In this regard, a promising
pattern is developing in certain regions whereby believers arise
to serve in a neighboring country or in one that is further afield
but within the same continent. This development brings with
it the advantage of a more intimate familiarity with the culture
and language of the country in which they settle, thereby
increasing their effectiveness and the efficiency with which their
services can be utilized.
Beyond responding to the specific appeals for homefront
and international pioneers that are issued from time to time
by the institutions, the friends are of course welcome to arise
at any time and from any place to settle in any area where
they feel they can best contribute to the advancement of the
Cause. Even so, their endeavors would yield greater effect if,
drawing on the advice of institutions, they were to direct their
efforts to clusters—indeed, villages and neighborhoods within
clusters—that are the focus of systematic attention. It is our
ardent hope that the believers will arise rank upon rank, with a
clarity of vision born of experience and with complete reliance
on the confirmations of God, to offer His life-giving Message
to every eager soul, to every receptive population. Our prayers
at the Sacred Threshold will accompany them as they strive to
seize the abundant opportunities now opening before them.
The Universal House of Justice

128

20
12 December 2011
To all National Spiritual Assemblies
Dearly loved Friends,
Across the globe Bahá’í communities are intently engaged
in executing the provisions of the Five Year Plan. Its opening
months now behind us, there is every indication that the study
of recent guidance and deliberations on the nature and extent of
capacity developed thus far are bearing fruit in focused, highly
unified action at the grass roots. Principally through the efforts
of homefront pioneers, in several hundred newly opened clusters, the first stirrings of a program for the sustained expansion
and consolidation of the Faith can already be felt, while in
several hundred more, further along the continuum of growth,
a pattern of rigorous activity is taking hold. Meanwhile the
friends in those clusters in the forefront of learning are gaining
mastery over the dynamics that characterize rapidly expanding,
relatively large communities.
In this connection, we are particularly happy to note the
degree of effort being exerted in every country to lend an added
measure of vitality to the institute process, so critical if increasing numbers are to participate actively in the work required
to bring into reality a new World Order. The operation of the
institute board; the functioning of coordinators at different
levels; the capabilities of friends serving as tutors of study
circles, animators of junior youth groups, teachers of children’s
classes; and the promotion of an environment conducive at
once to universal participation and mutual support and assistance—nowhere is the centrality of these to the fulfillment of
the community’s God-given mission lost on the friends. What
has been especially heartening to observe in this respect is the
widespread mobilization of resources dedicated to the junior
youth spiritual empowerment program. No less encouraging
is the zeal with which institutes have greeted the challenge of
129

20.1

20.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

preparing teachers for successive grades of Bahá’í children’s
classes as additional materials for this purpose have been made
available. It seems timely, then, to offer National Spiritual
Assemblies and their training institutes further guidance on the
implementation of the main sequence of courses and those that
branch off from it.

The path of service
20.3

20.4

A number of years ago, to aid the believers in thinking
about the process of growth at the level of the cluster, we
introduced the concept of two complementary movements.
The progress of a steady, ever-widening stream of individuals
through the courses of the institute represents one of these. It is
not only responsible for giving impetus to the other—the development of the cluster, discernable in the collective capacity to
manifest a pattern of life in conformity with the teachings of the
Faith—but also dependent on it for its own perpetuation. It was
in view of mounting evidence of the effects of the Ruhi Institute
curriculum on these two mutually reinforcing movements that
we recommended its adoption worldwide six years ago. At
the time, we did not comment specifically on the pedagogical
principles governing the curriculum; nevertheless, it should be
apparent to the friends that the curriculum possesses desirable
characteristics, some of which have been described in broad
terms in our messages regarding the current series of global
Plans. Of particular significance is its organizing principle:
developing capacity to serve the Cause and humanity in a
process likened to walking a path of service. This conception
shapes both content and structure.
The main sequence of courses is organized so as to set the
individual, whether Bahá’í or not, on a path being defined by
the accumulating experience of the community in its endeavor
to open before humanity the vision of Bahá’u’lláh’s World
Order. The very notion of a path is, itself, indicative of the nature and purpose of the courses, for a path invites participation,
it beckons to new horizons, it demands effort and movement, it
accommodates different paces and strides, it is structured and
defined. A path can be experienced and known, not only by one
or two but by scores upon scores; it belongs to the community.
To walk a path is a concept equally expressive. It requires of
the individual volition and choice; it calls for a set of skills
and abilities but also elicits certain qualities and attitudes; it
130

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

necessitates a logical progression but admits, when needed,
related lines of exploration; it may seem easy at the outset but
becomes more challenging further along. And crucially, one
walks the path in the company of others.
At present the main sequence consists of eight courses,
though it is understood there may eventually be as many
as eighteen that will address acts of service related to such
requirements as coordination and administration, social action
and involvement in the discourses of society. There are currently
two points along the sequence at which an individual may
choose to follow a specialized path of service. The first appears
at Book 3. From among the friends who complete it and begin
to offer a relatively simple class for children in the first grade
of a program for their spiritual education, a percentage will
want to dedicate themselves to this field of service, pursuing
in time a series of progressively more complex branch courses
for teaching Grades 2 to 6. This does not mean that they will
abandon study of the main sequence. Indeed, courses that make
up a specialized path of service anticipate that participants
are continuing to progress, each at a pace suitable to his or
her situation, along the path traced out by the main sequence.
Book 5, which seeks to raise up animators of junior youth
groups, constitutes the second point at which a series of courses
branch out.
Additional avenues of exploration will no doubt appear
along the main sequence in due time. Some may be of universal
interest, such as the two mentioned above, while others may
be limited to specific local needs. As with the main sequence
itself, content and structure must emerge out of continued
collective experience in the field, an experience that is not
haphazard or subject to the forces of personal preference but is
guided by the institutions of the Faith. The generation of such
an experience will call for a still greater infusion of energy from
a much larger portion of the population, and it would be premature, in all but a few places, for institutes to give attention to
the creation or implementation of other branch courses at this
juncture in the unfoldment of the current series of global Plans.

20.5

20.6

Coordination
Clearly, the approach to capacity building described above
represents an attempt to achieve a certain dynamics within a
population that brings together service and the generation of
131

20.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

20.8

20.9

20.10

knowledge and its diffusion, a subject which we discussed,
albeit briefly, in our Rid.ván 2010 message. Here we address a
few practical considerations, which the emergence of the two
aforementioned specialized paths of service has made all the
more relevant.
At any given moment it is possible to view from one of two
perspectives what occurs in a cluster as the pattern of action
promoted by the Five Year Plan, through which is woven the
fabric of a vibrant community life, gathers in strength. Both
perspectives are equally valid; each offers a particular way of
thinking and speaking about what is taking place. From one
perspective an educational process with three distinct stages
appears in sharp relief: the first for the youngest members of the
community, the second for those in the challenging transitional
years, and the third for youth and adults. In this context, one
speaks of three educational imperatives, each distinguished
by its own methods and materials, each claiming a share of
resources, and each served by mechanisms to systematize
experience and to generate knowledge based on insights gained
in the field. Quite naturally, then, three discussions take shape
around the implementation of the program for the spiritual
education of children, the junior youth spiritual empowerment
program, and the main sequence of courses.
From another perspective one thinks in terms of the threemonth cycles of activity through which a community grows—
the burst of expansion experienced as a result of intense action;
the necessary period of consolidation during which increases
in ranks are fortified as they, for example, participate in
devotional gatherings and the Nineteen Day Feast and receive
visits at their homes; and the opportunities designated for all
to reflect and plan. The question of teaching among receptive
populations moves to the foreground in this light, and the
challenge of seeking out souls who are willing to engage in a
conversation about the world around them and participate in a
collective effort to transform it comes into focus.
It is especially at the level of coordination that it proves
indispensable to step back and view from these two vantage
points what is essentially one reality. Doing so makes it poss­
ible to analyze accurately, to assess strategically, to allocate
wisely, and to avoid fragmentation. At this point, then, early
in the execution of the Plan, it seems more vital than ever for
attention to be devoted to the issue of coordination. Though
132

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

the basic elements of an effective organizational scheme are
already well understood, the form it should assume under
diverse circumstances is in need of articulation. We have asked
the International Teaching Centre to follow efforts made in this
direction, particularly in the several hundred furthest advanced
clusters worldwide, in order to effect the rapid systematization
of lessons learned.
In all such clusters, where the demands of large-scale
growth are asserting themselves, each stage of the educational
process promoted by the training institute must receive added
support. The work of the coordinator should be reinforced by
assistance from a growing number of experienced individuals,
and meetings for the exchange of information and insights
become regular and more systematic in approach. So, too,
must periodic occasions be created for the three coordinators
appointed by the institute—or, where applicable, teams of
coordinators concerned with study circles, junior youth groups
and children’s classes respectively—to examine together the
strength of the educational process as a whole. And they, in
turn, should meet on a regular basis with the Area Teaching
Committee. Further, if an adequate flow of information, guidance and much-needed funds is to reach the cluster, a parallel
set of steps will have to be taken by the board of the institute
to enhance the functioning of that agency at the regional level.
Where such a mature scheme of coordination is brought into
place, the Auxiliary Board members and their assistants will
be able to provide support across all areas of action with even
greater effectiveness.
One final point merits reflection in this respect. Nearly all
of the several hundred clusters under consideration are associated with one or another of some forty sites for the dissemination
of learning established by the Office of Social and Economic
Development at the World Centre in response to the overwhelming demand for the junior youth program experienced
throughout the world. Institutes operating in these clusters have
already benefited over the past year from knowledge gained
through the sites, particularly in relation to coordination of the
program. Without question, the capacity to sustain scores of
junior youth groups lent a powerful impetus to the progress of
all such clusters and contributed decisively to the subsequent
development of study circles and children’s classes. Sites supported by the Office of Social and Economic Development will
133

20.11

20.12

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

continue to assist training institutes in addressing the complex
set of questions arising out of the implementation of a program
for an age group whose enormous potential must remain
the object of ongoing exploration. We look to the institutes
themselves, however, to foster the learning process necessary to
manage large numbers of children’s classes and study circles,
to put in place a scheme at the cluster level that will strengthen
coordination across their three defined areas of action, and
to open the flow of resources from the regional level into the
grass roots—this, to ensure the seamless progression of sizable
contingents from one stage of the educational process to the
next and to facilitate the steady unfoldment of cycles of activity
so essential to systematic growth.

Classes for children
20.13

20.14

Among the range of questions now before every training
institute one stands out as particularly pressing: how to mobilize sufficient numbers of children’s class teachers for successive
grades and, by extension, tutors who can form groups to study
the requisite courses. The units that comprise the three books
currently available contain both materials for study by teachers
and lessons for children, allowing institutes to establish without
delay the first three grades of a six-year program. To raise up an
initial corps of teachers for these grades, they may well have to
employ temporary measures. A good scheme of coordination,
built incrementally in keeping with demands on the ground,
should make it possible to respond to exigencies with a degree
of flexibility while maintaining the integrity of the overall
educational process in the long term.
Besides the systematic training of teachers for successive
grades, institutes will need to learn about the formation of
classes for distinct age groups in villages and neighborhoods;
the provision of teachers for various classes; the retention of
students year after year, grade after grade; and the continued
progress of children from a wide variety of households and
backgrounds—in short, the establishment of an expanding,
sustainable system for child education that will keep pace with
both the growing concern among parents for their youngsters
to develop sound moral structures and the rise in human resources in the community. The task, while immense, is relatively
straightforward, and we urge institutes everywhere to give it the
attention which it so clearly deserves, focusing especially on the
134

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

implementation of the first three grades of the program and remembering that the quality of the teaching-learning experience
depends, to a great extent, on the capabilities of the teacher.
A word of caution seems to be in order. It is certainly not
incorrect to speak of “training” children’s class teachers or,
for that matter, animators of junior youth groups. Institutes,
however, ought to take care, lest they begin to perceive their
work as training in techniques, losing sight of the conception
of capacity building at the heart of the institute process that
entails a profound understanding of Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation.

20.15

Educational materials
In light of the foregoing paragraphs, the question of educational materials specifically as they pertain to children’s classes
and to junior youth groups has to be considered. With regard to
the former, we explained in our Rid.ván 2010 message that the
lessons prepared by the Ruhi Institute would constitute the core
of a program for the spiritual education of children, around
which secondary elements could be organized. Whether or not
any additional elements are required to reinforce the educational process for each grade would generally be determined by
teachers themselves, on the basis of specific circumstances, not
infrequently in consultation with the institute coordinator at
the cluster level. It is assumed that, if found to be appropriate,
any additional items would be selected from resources readily
available. There will seldom be cause to formalize the use of
such items, whether directly through their adoption by training
institutes or indirectly through their widespread systematic
promotion.
In the case of junior youth groups, a similar approach is
encouraged by the Office of Social and Economic Development.
The core of the program consists of a series of textbooks
studied by the groups. We understand that, at present, seven
of a projected eighteen textbooks, exploring a range of themes
from a Bahá’í perspective, though not in the mode of religious
instruction, are available. These form the major component of
a three-year program. Another nine textbooks will provide a
distinctly Bahá’í component, and two of these are currently in
use. Animators are advised to complement study with artistic
activities and service projects. As with children’s class teachers,
the institute coordinator at the cluster level can offer animators
assistance in determining how to proceed. Yet, most often,
135

20.16

20.17

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

20.18

20.19

such projects and activities are selected by the junior youth
themselves, in light of their own circumstances and inclinations,
in consultation with the group’s animator.
In all such matters, those serving as teachers and animators
alike are called upon to exercise discretion. Education is a
vast field, and educational theories abound. Surely many have
considerable merit, but it should be remembered that none is
free of assumptions about the nature of the human being and
society. An educational process should, for example, create in a
child awareness of his or her potentialities, but the glorification
of self has to be scrupulously avoided. So often in the name of
building confidence the ego is bolstered. Similarly, play has its
place in the education of the young. Children and junior youth,
however, have proven time and again their capacity to engage
in discussions on abstract subjects, undertaken at a level appropriate to their age, and derive great joy from the serious pursuit
of understanding. An educational process that dilutes content
in a mesmerizing sea of entertainment does them no service.
We trust that, in studying the institute courses, teachers and
animators will find themselves increasingly equipped to make
judicious decisions in selecting any materials or activities
necessary, whether from traditional educational sources or from
the wealth of items, such as songs, stories, and games, that are
sure to be developed for the young in the Bahá’í community in
the years to come.
Propelled by forces generated both within and outside the
Bahá’í community, the peoples of the earth can be seen to be
moving from divergent directions, closer and closer to one
another, towards what will be a world civilization so stupendous in character that it would be futile for us to attempt to
imagine it today. As this centripetal movement of populations
accelerates across the globe, some elements in every culture,
not in accord with the teachings of the Faith, will gradually fall
away, while others will be reinforced. By the same token, new
elements of culture will evolve over time as people hailing from
every human group, inspired by the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh,
give expression to patterns of thought and action engendered
by His teachings, in part through artistic and literary works.
It is with such considerations in mind that we welcome the
decision of the Ruhi Institute, in formulating its courses, to
leave for the friends to address locally issues related to artistic
activity. What we ask at this stage, then, when energies are to be
136

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

invested in the extension of children’s classes and junior youth
groups, is that the multiplication of supplementary items for
this purpose be allowed to occur naturally, as an outgrowth
of the process of community building gathering momentum in
villages and neighborhoods. We long to see, for instance, the
emergence of captivating songs from every part of the world,
in every language, that will impress upon the consciousness
of the young the profound concepts enshrined in the Bahá’í
teachings. Yet such an efflorescence of creative thought will fail
to materialize, should the friends fall, however inadvertently,
into patterns prevalent in the world that give license to those
with financial resources to impose their cultural perspective on
others, inundating them with materials and products aggressively promoted. Further, every effort should be made to protect
spiritual education from the perils of commercialization. The
Ruhi Institute itself has explicitly discouraged the proliferation
of products and items that treat its identity as a brand to be
marketed. We hope that the friends will respect its diligence in
this matter.
In this connection, it gives us pleasure to inform you that
we have created an International Advisory Board to assist the
Ruhi Institute in overseeing its system for the preparation, production, and distribution of materials, the content and structure
of which now draw extensively on Bahá’í experience worldwide
in applying the teachings and principles of the Faith to the life
of humanity. As it gradually takes up its work, the Board will
be able to respond to related issues and follow the development
of supplementary materials that are aligned with the direction
set by the global Plans.

20.20

***
In closing, we feel compelled to address a few words to
training institutes throughout the world: It should be remembered that the Bahá’í children’s class teacher and the junior
youth group animator, entrusted with so much responsibility for
strengthening the moral foundations of the community, will, in
most places, be a young person in his or her teens. Increasingly
these young people will emerge, it can be expected, from the
junior youth spiritual empowerment program imbued with a
strong twofold purpose, both to develop their inherent potentialities and to contribute to the transformation of society. But
they may also come from any one of a number of educational
137

20.21

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

backgrounds with all the hope in their hearts that, through
strenuous concerted effort, the world will change. Irrespective of
particulars, they will, one and all, share in the desire to dedicate
their time and energy, talents and abilities, to service to their
communities. Many, when given the opportunity, will gladly
devote a few years of their lives to the provision of spiritual
education to the rising generations. In the young people of the
world, then, lies a reservoir of capacity to transform society
waiting to be tapped. And the release of this capacity should be
regarded by every institute as a sacred charge.
The Universal House of Justice

138

21
Rid.ván 2012
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
Midafternoon on the eleventh day of the Rid.ván festival
one hundred years ago, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, standing before an audience several hundred strong, lifted a workman’s axe and pierced
the turf covering the Temple site at Grosse Pointe, north of
Chicago. Those invited to break the ground with Him on
that spring day came from diverse backgrounds—Norwegian,
Indian, French, Japanese, Persian, indigenous American, to
name but a few. It was as if the House of Worship, yet unbuilt,
was fulfilling the wishes of the Master, expressed on the eve of
the ceremony, for every such edifice: “that humanity might find
a place of meeting” and “that the proclamation of the oneness
of mankind shall go forth from its open courts of holiness.”
His listeners on that occasion, and all who heard Him in
the course of His travels to Egypt and the West, must have but
dimly comprehended the far-reaching implications of His words
for society, for its values and preoccupations. Still today, can
anyone claim to have glimpsed anything but an intimation, distant and indistinct, of the future society to which the Revelation
of Bahá’u’lláh is destined to give rise? For let none suppose
that the civilization towards which the divine teachings impel
humankind will follow merely from adjustments to the present
order. Far from it. In a talk delivered some days after He laid
the cornerstone of the Mother Temple of the West, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
stated that “among the results of the manifestation of spiritual
forces will be that the human world will adapt itself to a new
social form,” that “the justice of God will become manifest
throughout human affairs.” These, and countless other utterances of the Master to which the Bahá’í community is turning
time and again in this centennial period, raise awareness of the

139

21.1

21.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

21.3

21.4

distance that separates society as it is now arranged from the
stupendous vision His Father gifted to the world.
Alas, notwithstanding the laudable efforts, in every land, of
well-intentioned individuals working to improve circumstances
in society, the obstacles preventing the realization of such
a vision seem insurmountable to many. Their hopes founder on
erroneous assumptions about human nature that so permeate
the structures and traditions of much of present-day living as to
have attained the status of established fact. These assumptions
appear to make no allowance for the extraordinary reservoir
of spiritual potential available to any illumined soul who
draws upon it; instead, they rely for justification on humanity’s
failings, examples of which daily reinforce a common sense
of despair. A layered veil of false premises thus obscures a
fundamental truth: The state of the world reflects a distortion
of the human spirit, not its essential nature. The purpose of
every Manifestation of God is to effect a transformation in both
the inner life and external conditions of humanity. And this
transformation naturally occurs as a growing body of people,
united by the divine precepts, collectively seeks to develop
spiritual capacities to contribute to a process of societal change.
Akin to the hard earth struck by the Master a century ago, the
prevailing theories of the age may, at first, seem impervious to
alteration, but they will undoubtedly fade away, and through
the “vernal showers of the bounty of God,” the “flowers of true
understanding” will spring up fresh and fair.
We yield thanks to God that, through the potency of His
Word, you—the community of His Greatest Name—are cultivating environments wherein true understanding can blossom.
Even those enduring imprisonment for the Faith are, by their
untold sacrifice and steadfastness, enabling the “hyacinths
of knowledge and wisdom” to flower in sympathetic hearts.
Across the globe, eager souls are being engaged in the work of
constructing a new world through the systematic implementation of the provisions of the Five Year Plan. So well have its
features been grasped that we feel no need to comment further
on them here. Our supplications, offered at the Threshold
of an All-Bountiful Providence, are for the assistance of the
Supreme Concourse to be vouchsafed to every one of you in
contributing to the progress of the Plan. Our fervent desire,
bolstered by witnessing your consecrated efforts during the past
year, is that you will intensify your sure-footed application of
140

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

the knowledge you are acquiring through experience. Now is
not the time to hold back; too many remain unaware of the new
dawn. Who but you can convey the divine message? “By God,”
Bahá’u’lláh, referring to the Cause, affirms, “this is the arena
of insight and detachment, of vision and upliftment, where
none may spur on their chargers save the valiant horsemen of
the Merciful, who have severed all attachment to the world of
being.”
To observe the Bahá’í world at work is to behold a vista
bright indeed. In the life of the individual believer who desires,
above all, to invite others into communion with the Creator
and to render service to humanity can be found signs of the
spiritual transformation intended for every soul by the Lord
of the Age. In the spirit animating the activities of any Bahá’í
community dedicated to enhancing the capacity of its members
young and old, as well as of its friends and collaborators, to
serve the common weal can be perceived an indication of how
a society founded upon divine teachings might develop. And in
those advanced clusters where activity governed by the framework of the Plan is in abundance and the demands of ensuring
coherence amongst lines of action are most pressing, the evolving administrative structures offer glimmerings, however faint,
of how the institutions of the Faith will incrementally come to
assume a fuller range of their responsibilities to promote human
welfare and progress. Clearly, then, the development of the
individual, the community, and the institutions holds immense
promise. But beyond this, we note with particular joy how the
relationships binding these three are marked by such tender
affection and mutual support.
By contrast, relations among the three corresponding actors
in the world at large—the citizen, the body politic, and the
institutions of society—reflect the discord that characterizes
humanity’s turbulent stage of transition. Unwilling to act as
interdependent parts of an organic whole, they are locked in a
struggle for power which ultimately proves futile. How very different the society which ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, in unnumbered Tablets
and talks, depicts—where everyday interactions, as much as the
relations of states, are shaped by consciousness of the oneness
of humankind. Relationships imbued with this consciousness
are being cultivated by Bahá’ís and their friends in villages and
neighborhoods across the world; from them can be detected
the pure fragrances of reciprocity and cooperation, of concord
141

21.5

21.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

21.7

21.8

and love. Within such unassuming settings, a visible alternative
to society’s familiar strife is emerging. So it becomes apparent
that the individual who wishes to exercise self-expression
responsibly participates thoughtfully in consultation devoted
to the common good and spurns the temptation to insist on
personal opinion; a Bahá’í institution, appreciating the need
for coordinated action channeled toward fruitful ends, aims
not to control but to nurture and encourage; the community
that is to take charge of its own development recognizes an
invaluable asset in the unity afforded through wholehearted
engagement in the plans devised by the institutions. Under the
influence of Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation, the relationships among
these three are being endowed with new warmth, new life;
in aggregate, they constitute a matrix within which a world
spiritual civilization, bearing the imprint of divine inspiration,
gradually matures.
The light of the Revelation is destined to illumine every
sphere of endeavor; in each, the relationships that sustain
society are to be recast; in each, the world seeks examples of
how human beings should be to one another. We offer for your
consideration, given its conspicuous part in generating the
ferment in which so many people have recently been embroiled,
the economic life of humanity, where injustice is tolerated
with indifference and disproportionate gain is regarded as the
emblem of success. So deeply entrenched are such pernicious
attitudes that it is hard to imagine how any one individual can
alone alter the prevailing standards by which the relationships
in this domain are governed. Nevertheless, there are certainly
practices a Bahá’í would eschew, such as dishonesty in one’s
transactions or the economic exploitation of others. Faithful
adherence to the divine admonitions demands there be no
contradiction between one’s economic conduct and one’s beliefs
as a Bahá’í. By applying in one’s life those principles of the
Faith that relate to fairness and equity, a single soul can uphold
a standard far above the low threshold by which the world
measures itself. Humanity is weary for want of a pattern of life
to which to aspire; we look to you to foster communities whose
ways will give hope to the world.
In our Rid.ván message of 2001, we indicated that in
countries where the process of entry by troops was sufficiently
well advanced and conditions in national communities were
favorable, we would approve the establishment of Houses of
142

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Worship at the national level, whose emergence would become
a feature of the Fifth Epoch of the Formative Age of the Faith.
With exceeding joy we now announce that national Mashriqu’lAdhkárs are to be raised up in two countries: the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Papua New Guinea. In these, the
criteria we set are demonstrably met, and the response of their
peoples to the possibilities created by the current series of Plans
has been nothing short of remarkable. With the construction of
the last of the continental temples in Santiago under way, the
initiation of projects for building national Houses of Worship
offers yet another gratifying evidence of the penetration of the
Faith of God into the soil of society.
One more step is possible. The Mashriqu’l-Adhkár, described by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá as “one of the most vital institutions
of the world,” weds two essential, inseparable aspects of Bahá’í
life: worship and service. The union of these two is also reflected
in the coherence that exists among the community-building
features of the Plan, particularly the burgeoning of a devotional
spirit that finds expression in gatherings for prayer and an
educational process that builds capacity for service to humanity.
The correlation of worship and service is especially pronounced
in those clusters around the world where Bahá’í communities
have significantly grown in size and vitality, and where engagement in social action is apparent. Some of these have been
designated as sites for the dissemination of learning so as to
nurture the friends’ ability to advance the junior youth program
in associated regions. The capacity to sustain this program, as
we have recently indicated, also fuels the development of study
circles and children’s classes. Thus, beyond its primary purpose,
the learning site fortifies the entire scheme of expansion and
consolidation. It is within these clusters that, in the coming
years, the emergence of a local Mashriqu’l-Adhkár can be
contemplated. Our hearts brimming with thankfulness to the
Ancient Beauty, we rejoice to inform you that we are entering
into consultations with respective National Spiritual Assemblies
regarding the erection of the first local House of Worship in each
of the following clusters: Battambang, Cambodia; Bihar Sharif,
India; Matunda Soy, Kenya; Norte del Cauca, Colombia; and
Tanna, Vanuatu.
To support the construction of the two national and five
local Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs, we have decided to establish a
Temples Fund at the Bahá’í World Centre for the benefit of all
143

21.9

21.10

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

21.11

such projects. The friends everywhere are invited to contribute
to it sacrificially, as their means allow.
Beloved coworkers: The ground broken by the hand of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá a hundred years ago is to be broken again in
seven more countries, this being but the prelude to the day
when within every city and village, in obedience to the bidding
of Bahá’u’lláh, a building is upraised for the worship of the
Lord. From these Dawning-Points of the Remembrance of
God will shine the rays of His light and peal out the anthems
of His praise.
The Universal House of Justice

144

22
8 February 2013
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
Within communities of every size and strength, we are
glad to see the processes of the Five Year Plan kindling the
spirit of service and stimulating purposeful action. Examples
appear every day of how the act of reaching out to touch
individual hearts, acquainting souls with the Word of God, and
inviting them to contribute to the betterment of society can,
in time, tend to the advancement of a people. This collective
movement becomes discernible when the Plan’s elements are
combined into a well-coordinated cluster-wide effort, the
dynamics of which are becoming increasingly familiar. Such a
cluster becomes the setting for experienced believers as much
as those newly introduced to the Faith, whatever their age or
background, to work side by side, accompanying one another in
their service, enabling everyone to participate in the unfoldment
of the Plan.
From the panorama of the Bahá’í world engaged in earnest
activity, one phenomenon strikes us especially: the decisive contribution made by youth on every continent. In this phenomenon we see the vindication of the hopes the beloved Guardian
invested in them “for the future progress and expansion of the
Cause” and of the confidence with which he laid upon their
shoulders “all the responsibility for the upkeep of the spirit of
selfless service among their fellow-believers.” We are struck, too,
by the number of youth who, after only a brief association with
the Bahá’í community, commit themselves to meaningful acts
of service and quickly discover their affinity with the Faith’s
community-building endeavor. Indeed, in contemplating both
the Bahá’í youth and their like-minded peers, we cannot but
rejoice at their eagerness to take on a measure of responsibility
to aid the spiritual and social development of those around
145

22.1

22.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

22.3

them, especially ones younger than themselves. In an age
consumed by self-interest, in which even spiritual affiliation
is weighed in the scales of reward and personal satisfaction, it
is heartening to encounter individuals from their mid-teens to
their twenties—those upon whom the sights of an aggressive
materialism are decidedly trained—who are galvanized by the
vision of Bahá’u’lláh and are ready to put the needs of others
before their own. That such high-minded youth, by dint of
their own exertions as well as the momentum they lend to
the whole community, should be contributing so effectively to
efforts everywhere under way bodes well for the anticipated
acceleration of these efforts.
What has been accomplished in the past two years will,
surely, be far surpassed, not just in the concluding years of this
present Plan but in the remaining years of the first century of
the Formative Age. To spur on this mighty enterprise and to
summon today’s youth to fully assume the responsibilities they
must discharge in this fast-contracting interval, we announce
the convocation of 95 youth conferences, between July and
October, planned for locations that span the globe: Accra, Addis
Ababa, Aguascalientes, Almaty, Antananarivo, Apia, Atlanta,
Auckland, Baku, Bangalore, Bangui, Bardiya, Battambang,
Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Boston, Brasília, Bridgetown, Bukavu,
Cali, Canoas, Cartagena de Indias, Chennai, Chibombo,
Chicago, Chişinău, Cochabamba, Daidanaw, Dakar, Dallas,
Danané, Dar es Salaam, Dhaka, Dnipropetrovsk, Durham
(United States), Frankfurt, Guwahati, Helsinki, Istanbul (2),
Jakarta, Johannesburg, Kadugannawa, Kampala, Kananga,
Karachi, Khujand, Kinshasa, Kolkata, Kuching, Lae, Lima,
London, Lubumbashi, Lucknow, Macau, Madrid, Manila,
Matunda Soy, Moscow, Mwinilunga, Mzuzu, Nadi, Nairobi,
New Delhi, Oakland, Otavalo, Ouagadougou, Panchgani,
Paris, Patna, Perth, Phoenix, Port-au-Prince, Port Dickson,
Port Moresby, Port-Vila, San Diego, San José (Costa Rica), San
Jose City (Philippines), San Salvador, Santiago, Sapele, Sarh,
Seberang Perai, South Tarawa, Sydney, Tbilisi, Thyolo, Tirana,
Toronto, Ulaanbaatar, Vancouver, Verona, Yaoundé. We extend
an invitation to these gatherings to every youth who recognizes
in the methods and instruments of the Plan potent means for
movement towards a better society. And from Bahá’ís of all
ages, we invite wholehearted support for the participants upon
whose efforts so much depends.
146

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Beloved friends: To every generation of young believers
comes an opportunity to make a contribution to the fortunes
of humanity, unique to their time of life. For the present
generation, the moment has come to reflect, to commit, to steel
themselves for a life of service from which blessing will flow in
abundance. In our prayers at the Sacred Threshold, we entreat
the Ancient Beauty that, from out a distracted and bewildered
humanity, He may distill pure souls endowed with clear sight:
youth whose integrity and uprightness are not undermined by
dwelling on the faults of others and who are not immobilized
by any shortcomings of their own; youth who will look to the
Master and “bring those who have been excluded into the circle
of intimate friends”; youth whose consciousness of the failings
of society impels them to work for its transformation, not to
distance themselves from it; youth who, whatever the cost, will
refuse to pass by inequity in its many incarnations and will
labor, instead, that “the light of justice may shed its radiance
upon the whole world.”
The Universal House of Justice

147

22.4

23
2 March 2013
To the Bahá’ís of Iran
Dearly loved Friends,
For three and a half decades now, wave after wave of persecution, varying in intensity, has battered your sorely tried and
valiant community, a barrage that is but the latest in a series
unleashed over one hundred and sixty years ago. Yet, contrary
to the expectations of those bent on sapping the strength of
the community of Bahá’u’lláh’s followers in His homeland,
their machinations have served ultimately to reinforce its
foundations and fortify its ranks. More and more of your compatriots, themselves victims of oppression, not only see clearly
the trail of injustices that have been perpetrated against Bahá’ís
down the years but also recognize in your unbroken record of
disinterested service to society a force of constructive change.
As sympathy towards you continues to grow, so do the voices
calling for the removal of the obstacles that have prevented you
from participating in the life of society in all of its dimensions.
Not surprisingly, then, questions regarding the posture held by
Bahá’ís everywhere towards political activity have taken on
greater significance in the eyes of your fellow citizens.
Historically, of course, the position in which the Iranian
Bahá’í community has found itself in this respect has been
a peculiar one. It has been falsely accused, on the one hand,
of being politically motivated, leagued against the prevailing
regime—the agent of whatever foreign power the accuser
finds most convenient to his purpose. On the other hand, the
uncompromising refusal of the members of the community to
participate in partisan political activity has been portrayed as
a lack of concern for the affairs of the Iranian people. Now
that the true intentions of your oppressors have been laid bare,
it behooves you to respond to the growing interest of your
fellow citizens in understanding the Bahá’í attitude towards
149

23.1

23.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

23.3

23.4

politics, lest misconceptions be allowed to weaken the bonds of
friendship you are establishing with so many souls. In this, they
deserve more than a few statements, however important, that
evoke images of love and unity. To assist you in conveying to
them a vision of the framework that shapes the Bahá’í approach
to the subject, we are providing you with the comments below.
Inseparable from the Bahá’í perspective on politics is a particular conception of history, its course and direction. Humanity,
it is the firm conviction of every follower of Bahá’u’lláh, is approaching today the crowning stage in a millennia-long process
which has brought it from its collective infancy to the threshold
of maturity—a stage that will witness the unification of the
human race. Not unlike the individual who passes through the
unsettled yet promising period of adolescence, during which
latent powers and capacities come to light, humankind as a
whole is in the midst of an unprecedented transition. Behind so
much of the turbulence and commotion of contemporary life
are the fits and starts of a humanity struggling to come of age.
Widely accepted practices and conventions, cherished attitudes
and habits, are one by one being rendered obsolete, as the
imperatives of maturity begin to assert themselves.
Bahá’ís are encouraged to see in the revolutionary changes
taking place in every sphere of life the interaction of two fundamental processes. One is destructive in nature, while the other is
integrative; both serve to carry humanity, each in its own way,
along the path leading towards its full maturity. The operation
of the former is everywhere apparent—in the vicissitudes that
have afflicted time-honored institutions, in the impotence of
leaders at all levels to mend the fractures appearing in the
structure of society, in the dismantling of social norms that have
long held in check unseemly passions, and in the despondency
and indifference exhibited not only by individuals but also by
entire societies that have lost any vital sense of purpose. Though
devastating in their effects, the forces of disintegration tend to
sweep away barriers that block humanity’s progress, opening
space for the process of integration to draw diverse groups
together and disclosing new opportunities for cooperation and
collaboration. Bahá’ís, of course, strive to align themselves,
individually and collectively, with forces associated with the
process of integration, which, they are confident, will continue
to gain in strength, no matter how bleak the immediate hori-

150

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

zons. Human affairs will be utterly reorganized, and an era of
universal peace inaugurated.
Such is the view of history that underlies every endeavor
pursued by the Bahá’í community.
As you know from your study of the Bahá’í writings, the
principle that is to infuse all facets of organized life on the
planet is the oneness of humankind, the hallmark of the age
of maturity. That humanity constitutes a single people is a
truth that, once viewed with skepticism, claims widespread
acceptance today. The rejection of deeply ingrained prejudices
and a growing sense of world citizenship are among the signs
of this heightened awareness. Yet, however promising the rise
in collective consciousness may be, it should be seen as only the
first step of a process that will take decades—nay, centuries—to
unfold. For the principle of the oneness of humankind, as proclaimed by Bahá’u’lláh, asks not merely for cooperation among
people and nations. It calls for a complete reconceptualization
of the relationships that sustain society. The deepening environmental crisis, driven by a system that condones the pillage
of natural resources to satisfy an insatiable thirst for more,
suggests how entirely inadequate is the present conception of
humanity’s relationship with nature; the deterioration of the
home environment, with the accompanying rise in the systematic exploitation of women and children worldwide, makes
clear how pervasive are the misbegotten notions that define
relations within the family unit; the persistence of despotism, on
the one hand, and the increasing disregard for authority, on the
other, reveal how unsatisfactory to a maturing humanity is the
current relationship between the individual and the institutions
of society; the concentration of material wealth in the hands of
a minority of the world’s population gives an indication of how
fundamentally ill-conceived are relationships among the many
sectors of what is now an emerging global community. The
principle of the oneness of humankind implies, then, an organic
change in the very structure of society.
What should be stated plainly here is that Bahá’ís do not
believe the transformation thus envisioned will come about
exclusively through their own efforts. Nor are they trying to
create a movement that would seek to impose on society their
vision of the future. Every nation and every group—indeed,
every individual—will, to a greater or lesser degree, contribute
to the emergence of the world civilization towards which
151

23.5
23.6

23.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

23.8

23.9

humanity is irresistibly moving. Unity will progressively be
achieved, as foreshadowed by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, in different realms
of social existence, for instance, “unity in the political realm,”
“unity of thought in world undertakings,” “unity of races”
and the “unity of nations.” As these come to be realized, the
structures of a politically united world, which respects the full
diversity of culture and provides channels for the expression of
dignity and honor, will gradually take shape.
The question that occupies the worldwide Bahá’í community, then, is how it can best contribute to the civilization-building
process as its resources increase. It sees two dimensions to its
contribution. The first is related to its own growth and development, and the second to its involvement in society at large.
Regarding the first, Bahá’ís across the globe, in the most unassuming settings, are striving to establish a pattern of activity
and the corresponding administrative structures that embody
the principle of the oneness of humankind and the convictions
underpinning it, only a few of which are mentioned here as a
means of illustration: that the rational soul has no gender, race,
ethnicity or class, a fact that renders intolerable all forms of
prejudice, not the least of which are those that prevent women
from fulfilling their potential and engaging in various fields of
endeavor shoulder to shoulder with men; that the root cause of
prejudice is ignorance, which can be erased through educational
processes that make knowledge accessible to the entire human
race, ensuring it does not become the property of a privileged
few; that science and religion are two complementary systems
of knowledge and practice by which human beings come to
understand the world around them and through which civilization advances; that religion without science soon degenerates
into superstition and fanaticism, while science without religion
becomes the tool of crude materialism; that true prosperity,
the fruit of a dynamic coherence between the material and
spiritual requirements of life, will recede further and further out
of reach as long as consumerism continues to act as opium to
the human soul; that justice, as a faculty of the soul, enables the
individual to distinguish truth from falsehood and guides the
investigation of reality, so essential if superstitious beliefs and
outworn traditions that impede unity are to be eliminated; that,
when appropriately brought to bear on social issues, justice
is the single most important instrument for the establishment
of unity; that work performed in the spirit of service to one’s
152

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

fellow human beings is a form of prayer, a means of worshipping God. Translating ideals such as these into reality, effecting
a transformation at the level of the individual and laying the
foundations of suitable social structures, is no small task, to be
sure. Yet the Bahá’í community is dedicated to the long-term
process of learning that this task entails, an enterprise in which
increasing numbers from all walks of life, from every human
group, are invited to take part.
Numerous, of course, are the questions that the process
of learning, now under way in all regions of the world,
must address: how to bring people of different backgrounds
together in an environment which, devoid of the constant
threat of conflict and distinguished by its devotional character,
encourages them to put aside the divisive ways of a partisan
mindset, fosters higher degrees of unity of thought and action,
and elicits wholehearted participation; how to administer the
affairs of a community in which there is no ruling class with
priestly functions that can lay claim to distinction or privilege;
how to enable contingents of men and women to break free
from the confines of passivity and the chains of oppression in
order to engage in activities conducive to their spiritual, social
and intellectual development; how to help youth navigate
through a crucial stage of their lives and become empowered
to direct their energies towards the advancement of civilization;
how to create dynamics within the family unit that lead to
material and spiritual prosperity without instilling in the
rising generations feelings of estrangement towards an illusory
“other” or nurturing any instinct to exploit those relegated to
this category; how to make it possible for decision making to
benefit from a diversity of perspectives through a consultative
process which, understood as the collective investigation of
reality, promotes detachment from personal views, gives due
importance to valid empirical information, does not raise mere
opinion to the status of fact or define truth as the compromise
between opposing interest groups. To explore questions such as
these and the many others certain to arise, the Bahá’í community has adopted a mode of operation characterized by action,
reflection, consultation and study—study which involves not
only constant reference to the writings of the Faith but also
the scientific analysis of patterns unfolding. Indeed, how to
maintain such a mode of learning in action, how to ensure that
growing numbers participate in the generation and application
153

23.10

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

23.11

23.12

of relevant knowledge, and how to devise structures for the
systemization of an expanding worldwide experience and for
the equitable distribution of the lessons learned—these are,
themselves, the object of regular examination.
The overall direction of the process of learning that the
Bahá’í community is pursuing is guided by a series of global
plans, the provisions of which are established by the Universal
House of Justice. Capacity building is the watchword of these
plans: they aim at enabling the protagonists of collective
effort to strengthen the spiritual foundations of villages and
neighborhoods, to address certain of their social and economic
needs, and to contribute to the discourses prevalent in society,
all while maintaining the necessary coherence in methods and
approaches.
At the heart of the learning process is inquiry into the
nature of the relationships that bind the individual, the community, and the institutions of society—actors on the stage of
history who have been locked in a struggle for power throughout time. In this context, the assumption that relations among
them will inevitably conform to the dictates of competition, a
notion that ignores the extraordinary potential of the human
spirit, has been set aside in favor of the more likely premise that
their harmonious interactions can foster a civilization befitting
a mature humanity. Animating the Bahá’í effort to discover the
nature of a new set of relationships among these three protagonists is a vision of a future society that derives inspiration
from the analogy drawn by Bahá’u’lláh, in a Tablet penned
nearly a century and a half ago, which compares the world
to the human body. Cooperation is the principle that governs
the functioning of that system. Just as the appearance of the
rational soul in this realm of existence is made possible through
the complex association of countless cells, whose organization
in tissues and organs allows for the realization of distinctive
capacities, so can civilization be seen as the outcome of a set
of interactions among closely integrated, diverse components
which have transcended the narrow purpose of tending to their
own existence. And just as the viability of every cell and every
organ is contingent upon the health of the body as a whole, so
should the prosperity of every individual, every family, every
people be sought in the well-being of the entire human race. In
keeping with such a vision, institutions, appreciating the need
for coordinated action channelled toward fruitful ends, aim
154

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

not to control but to nurture and guide the individual, who, in
turn, willingly receives guidance, not in blind obedience, but
with faith founded on conscious knowledge. The community,
meanwhile, takes on the challenge of sustaining an environment
where the powers of individuals, who wish to exercise self-expression responsibly in accordance with the common weal and
the plans of institutions, multiply in unified action.
If the web of relationships alluded to above is to take shape
and give rise to a pattern of life distinguished by adherence to
the principle of the oneness of humankind, certain foundational
concepts must be carefully examined. Most notable among
them is the conception of power. Clearly the concept of power
as a means of domination, with the accompanying notions
of contest, contention, division and superiority, must be left
behind. This is not to deny the operation of power; after all,
even in cases where institutions of society have received their
mandates through the consent of the people, power is involved
in the exercise of authority. But political processes, like other
processes of life, should not remain unaffected by the powers
of the human spirit that the Bahá’í Faith—for that matter,
every great religious tradition that has appeared throughout
the ages—hopes to tap: the power of unity, of love, of humble
service, of pure deeds. Associated with power in this sense are
words such as “release,” “encourage,” “channel,” “guide” and
“enable.” Power is not a finite entity which is to be “seized”
and “jealously guarded”; it constitutes a limitless capacity to
transform that resides in the human race as a body.
The Bahá’í community readily acknowledges that it has a
considerable distance to traverse before its growing experience
yields the necessary insights into the workings of the desired
set of interactions. It makes no claims to perfection. To uphold
high ideals and to have become their embodiment are not one
and the same. Myriad are the challenges that lie ahead, and
much remains to be learned. The casual observer may well
choose to label the community’s attempts to surmount these
challenges “idealistic.” Yet it certainly would not be justified
to portray Bahá’ís as uninterested in the affairs of their own
countries, much less as unpatriotic. However idealistic the
Bahá’í endeavor may appear to some, its deep-seated concern
for the good of humankind cannot be ignored. And given that
no current arrangement in the world seems capable of lifting
humanity from the quagmire of conflict and contention and
155

23.13

23.14

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

23.15

securing its felicity, why would any government object to the
efforts of one group of people to deepen its understanding of
the nature of those essential relationships inherent to the common future towards which the human race is being inexorably
drawn? What harm is there in this?
Within the framework traced out by the above ideas, then,
it is possible to consider the second dimension of the Bahá’í
community’s efforts to contribute to the advancement of civilization: its involvement in society at large. Clearly what Bahá’ís
see as one aspect of their contribution cannot contradict the
other. They cannot be seeking to establish patterns of thought
and action that give expression to the principle of oneness within their community, yet engage in activities in another context
which, to whatever extent, reinforce an entirely different set
of assumptions about social existence. To avoid such a duality,
the Bahá’í community has progressively refined over time, on
the basis of the teachings of the Faith, the main features of its
participation in the life of society. First and foremost, Bahá’ís
endeavor, whether as individuals or as a community, to put into
practice the command of Bahá’u’lláh: “They that are endued
with sincerity and faithfulness should associate with all the peoples and kindreds of the earth with joy and radiance, inasmuch
as consorting with people hath promoted and will continue to
promote unity and concord, which in turn are conducive to the
maintenance of order in the world and to the regeneration of
nations.” It is through “association and meeting,” ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
has explained further, that “we find happiness and development,
individual and collective.” “That which is conducive to association and attraction and unity among the sons of men,” He
has written in this connection, “is the means of the life of the
world of humanity, and whatever causeth division, repulsion
and remoteness leadeth to the death of humankind.” Even
in the case of religion, He has made it clear that it “must be
the cause of love and fellowship. Should religion become the
cause of contention and enmity, its absence is preferable.” So
it is that Bahá’ís do their utmost at all times to heed the counsel
of Bahá’u’lláh, “Shut your eyes to estrangement, then fix your
gaze upon unity “That one indeed is a man,” He exhorts His
followers, “who, today, dedicateth himself to the service of the
entire human race.” “Be anxiously concerned with the needs of
the age ye live in,” is His admonition, “and center your deliberations on its exigencies and requirements.” “The supreme need
156

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

of humanity is cooperation and reciprocity,” ‘Abdu’l-Bahá has
indicated. “The stronger the ties of fellowship and solidarity
amongst men, the greater will be the power of constructiveness
and accomplishment in all the planes of human activity.” “So
powerful is the light of unity,” Bahá’u’lláh declares, “that it can
illuminate the whole earth.”
It is with such thoughts in mind that Bahá’ís enter into
collaboration, as their resources permit, with an increasing
number of movements, organizations, groups and individuals,
establishing partnerships that strive to transform society
and further the cause of unity, promote human welfare, and
contribute to world solidarity. Indeed, the standard set by
passages such as the above inspires the Bahá’í community to
become actively engaged in as many aspects of contemporary
life as feasible. In choosing areas of collaboration, Bahá’ís are
to bear in mind the principle, enshrined in their teachings,
that means should be consistent with ends; noble goals cannot
be achieved through unworthy means. Specifically, it is not
possible to build enduring unity through endeavors that require
contention or assume that an inherent conflict of interests
underlies all human interactions, however subtly. It should be
noted here that, despite the limitations imposed by adherence
to this principle, the community has not experienced a shortage
of opportunities for collaboration; so many people in the world
today are working intensely towards one or another aim which
Bahá’ís share. In this respect, they also take care not to overstep
certain bounds with their colleagues and associates. They are
not to regard any joint undertaking as an occasion to impose
religious convictions. Self-righteousness and other unfortunate
manifestations of religious zeal are to be utterly avoided.
Bahá’ís do, however, readily offer to their collaborators the
lessons they have learned through their own experience, just as
they are happy to incorporate into their community-building
efforts insights gained through such association.
This brings us, at last, to the specific question of political
activity. The conviction of the Bahá’í community that humanity,
having passed through earlier stages of social evolution, stands
at the threshold of its collective maturity; its belief that the
principle of the oneness of humankind, the hallmark of the age
of maturity, implies a change in the very structure of society; its
dedication to a learning process that, animated by this principle, explores the workings of a new set of relationships among
157

23.16

23.17

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

23.18

the individual, the community and the institutions of society,
the three protagonists in the advancement of civilization; its
confidence that a revised conception of power, freed from the
notion of dominance with the accompanying ideas of contest,
contention, division and superiority, underlies the desired set
of relationships; its commitment to a vision of a world that,
benefitting from humanity’s rich cultural diversity, abides no
lines of separation—these all constitute essential elements of
the framework that shapes the Bahá’í approach to politics set
out in brief below.
Bahá’ís do not seek political power. They will not accept
political posts in their respective governments, whatever the
particular system in place, though they will take up positions
which they deem to be purely administrative in nature. They
will not affiliate themselves with political parties, become
entangled in partisan issues, or participate in programs tied to
the divisive agendas of any group or faction. At the same time,
Bahá’ís respect those who, out of a sincere desire to serve their
countries, choose to pursue political aspirations or to engage
in political activity. The approach adopted by the Bahá’í community of noninvolvement in such activity is not intended as
a statement expressing some fundamental objection to politics
in its true sense; indeed, humanity organizes itself through its
political affairs. Bahá’ís vote in civil elections, as long as they
do not have to identify themselves with any party in order to
do so. In this connection, they view government as a system for
maintaining the welfare and orderly progress of a society, and
they undertake, one and all, to observe the laws of the land in
which they reside, without allowing their inner religious beliefs
to be violated. Bahá’ís will not be party to any instigation to
overthrow a government. Nor will they interfere in political
relations between the governments of different nations. This
does not mean that they are naive about political processes
in the world today and make no distinction between just and
tyrannical rule. The rulers of the earth have sacred obligations
to fulfill towards their people, who should be seen as the most
precious treasure of any nation. Wherever they reside, Bahá’ís
endeavor to uphold the standard of justice, addressing inequities directed towards themselves or towards others, but only
through lawful means available to them, eschewing all forms
of violent protest. Moreover, in no way does the love they hold
in their hearts for humanity run counter to the sense of duty
158

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

they feel to expend their energies in service to their respective
countries.
The approach, or strategy if you will, with the simple set
of parameters outlined in the foregoing paragraph enables the
community, in a world where nations and tribes are pitted
one against the other and people are divided and separated by
social structures, to maintain its cohesion and integrity as a
global entity and to ensure that the activities of the Bahá’ís in
one country do not jeopardize the existence of those elsewhere.
Guarded against competing interests of nations and political
parties, the Bahá’í community is thus able to build its capacity
to contribute to processes that promote peace and unity.
Dear Friends: We recognize that treading this path, which
you have done so ably for decades, is not without its challenges.
It asks for an integrity that cannot be shaken, for a rectitude
of conduct that cannot be undermined, for a clarity of thought
that cannot be obscured, for a love of one’s country that cannot
be manipulated. Now that your fellow citizens understand
your plight, and possibilities will no doubt open for you to
participate even further in the life of society, we pray that you
will be assisted from on High in explaining to your friends and
compatriots the framework articulated in these pages so that, in
collaboration with them, you will find increasing opportunities
to labor for the good of your people without compromising,
in any way, your identity as followers of One Who summoned
humanity, more than a century ago, to a new World Order.
The Universal House of Justice

159

23.19

23.20

24
Rid.ván 2013
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
“The Book of God is wide open, and His Word is summoning mankind unto Him.” In such exhilarating terms does
the Supreme Pen describe the advent of the day of union and
ingathering. Bahá’u’lláh continues: “Incline your ears, O friends
of God, to the voice of Him Whom the world hath wronged,
and hold fast unto whatsoever will exalt His Cause.” He further
exhorts His followers: “With the utmost friendliness and in
a spirit of perfect fellowship take ye counsel together, and
dedicate the precious days of your lives to the betterment of
the world and the promotion of the Cause of Him Who is the
Ancient and Sovereign Lord of all.”
Beloved coworkers: This stirring pronouncement comes to
mind unbidden when we see your consecrated efforts around
the world in answer to the call of Bahá’u’lláh. The splendid
response to His summons can be witnessed on every side. To
those who pause to reflect on the unfoldment of the Divine
Plan, it becomes impossible to ignore how the power possessed
by the Word of God is ascendant in the hearts of women and
men, children and youth, in country after country, in cluster
after cluster.
A worldwide community is refining its ability to read its
immediate reality, analyze its possibilities, and apply judiciously the methods and instruments of the Five Year Plan.
As anticipated, experience is most rapidly accumulating in
clusters where the frontiers of learning are being consciously
advanced. In such places, the means for enabling an ever-rising
number of individuals to strengthen their capacity for service
are well understood. A vibrant training institute functions as
the mainstay of the community’s efforts to advance the Plan
and, as early as possible, skills and abilities developed through
161

24.1

24.2

24.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

24.4

participation in institute courses are deployed in the field. Some,
through their everyday social interactions, encounter souls who
are open to the exploration of spiritual matters carried out in a
variety of settings; some are in a position to respond to receptivity in a village or neighborhood, perhaps by having relocated
to the area. Growing numbers arise to shoulder responsibility,
swelling the ranks of those who serve as tutors, animators, and
teachers of children; who administer and coordinate; or who
otherwise labor in support of the work. The friends’ commitment to learning finds expression through constancy in their
own endeavors and a willingness to accompany others in theirs.
Further, they are able to keep two complementary perspectives
on the pattern of action developing in the cluster firmly in view:
one, the three-month cycles of activity—the rhythmic pulse of
the program of growth—and the other, the distinct stages of
a process of education for children, for junior youth, and for
youth and adults. While understanding clearly the relationship
that connects these three stages, the friends are aware that
each has its own dynamics, its own requirements, and its own
inherent merit. Above all, they are conscious of the operation
of powerful spiritual forces, whose workings can be discerned
as much in the quantitative data that reflect the community’s
progress as in the array of accounts that narrate its accomplishments. What is especially promising is that so many of these
distinctive and salient features which characterize the clusters
furthest advanced are also evident in communities at much
earlier points in their development.
As the experience of the friends has deepened, their capacity
for fostering within a cluster a rich and intricate pattern of life,
embracing hundreds or even thousands of people, has risen.
How pleased we are to note the many insights the believers are
gaining from their endeavors. They appreciate, for instance,
that the Plan’s gradual unfoldment at the level of the cluster
is a dynamic process, one that is necessarily complex and does
not lend itself to ready simplification. They see how it moves
forward as they increase their ability both to raise up human
resources and to coordinate and organize well the actions of
those who arise. The friends realize that as these capacities are
enhanced, it becomes possible to integrate a wider range of
initiatives. Equally, they have come to recognize that when a
new feature is introduced it requires special attention for some
time, but that this in no way diminishes the significance of other
162

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

aspects of their community-building endeavors. For they understand that if learning is to be their mode of operation, they must
be alert to the potential offered by any instrument of the Plan
that proves to be especially suited to a particular point in time
and, where called for, invest greater energy in its development;
it does not follow, however, that every person must be occupied
with the same aspect of the Plan. The friends have also learned
that it is not necessary for the principal focus of the expansion
phase of every cycle of a program of growth to be directed
towards the same end. Conditions may require that in a given
cycle, as an example, attention be primarily aimed at inviting
souls to embrace the Faith through intensive teaching efforts,
undertaken as individuals or collectively; in another cycle, the
focus could be on multiplying a specific core activity.
Furthermore, the friends are conscious that the work of
the Cause proceeds at different speeds in different places and
for good reason—it is, after all, an organic phenomenon—and
they take joy and encouragement from every instance of progress they see. Indeed, they recognize the benefit that accrues
from the contribution of each individual to the progress of the
whole, and thus the service rendered by each one, in keeping
with the possibilities created by a person’s circumstances, is
welcomed by all. Gatherings for reflection are increasingly seen
as occasions where the community’s efforts, in their entirety, are
the subject of earnest and uplifting deliberation. Participants
learn what has been accomplished overall, understand their
own labors in that light, and enhance their knowledge about the
process of growth by absorbing the counsels of the institutions
and drawing on the experience of their fellow believers. Such
experience is also shared in numerous other spaces that are
emerging for consultation amongst friends intensely engaged in
specific endeavors, whether they are pursuing a common line
of action or serving in a particular part of the cluster. All these
insights are located in a wider appreciation that progress is
most easily achieved in an environment imbued with love—one
in which shortcomings are overlooked with forbearance, obstacles are overcome with patience, and tested approaches are
embraced with enthusiasm. And so it is that, through the wise
direction of institutions and agencies of the Faith functioning at
every level, the friends’ exertions, however modest individually,
coalesce into a collective effort to ensure that receptivity to the
call of the Blessed Beauty is identified quickly and nurtured
163

24.5

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

24.6

effectively. A cluster in this condition is clearly one where
the relationships among the individual, the institutions, and
the community—the Plan’s three protagonists—are evolving
soundly.
From this landscape of thriving activity, one prospect
deserves particular mention. In the message addressed to you
three years ago, we expressed the hope that, in clusters with an
intensive program of growth in operation, the friends would endeavor to learn more about the ways of community building by
developing centers of intense activity in neighborhoods and villages. Our hopes have been exceeded, for even in clusters where
the program of growth has not yet achieved intensity, efforts by
a few to initiate core activities among the residents of small areas have demonstrated their efficacy time and again. In essence,
this approach centers on the response to Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings
on the part of populations who are ready for the spiritual
transformation His Revelation fosters. Through participation in
the educational process promoted by the training institute, they
are motivated to reject the torpor and indifference inculcated
by the forces of society and pursue, instead, patterns of action
which prove life altering. Where this approach has advanced
for some years in a neighborhood or village and the friends
have sustained their focus, remarkable results are becoming
gradually but unmistakably evident. Youth are empowered
to take responsibility for the development of those around
them younger than themselves. Older generations welcome
the contribution of the youth to meaningful discussions about
the affairs of the whole community. For young and old alike,
the discipline cultivated through the community’s educational
process builds capacity for consultation, and new spaces emerge
for purposeful conversation. Yet change is not confined merely
to the Bahá’ís and those who are involved in the core activities
called for by the Plan, who might reasonably be expected to
adopt new ways of thinking over time. The very spirit of the
place is affected. A devotional attitude takes shape within a
broad sweep of the population. Expressions of the equality of
men and women become more pronounced. The education of
children, both boys and girls, commands greater attention. The
character of relationships within families—molded by assumptions centuries old—alters perceptibly. A sense of duty towards
one’s immediate community and physical environment becomes
prevalent. Even the scourge of prejudice, which casts its baleful
164

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

shadow on every society, begins to yield to the compelling force
of unity. In short, the community-building work in which the
friends are engaged influences aspects of culture.
While expansion and consolidation have steadily progressed
over the past year, other important areas of activity have also
moved forward, often in close parallel. As a prime example, the
advances at the level of culture being witnessed in some villages
and neighborhoods are due in no small part to what is being
learned from Bahá’í involvement in social action. Our Office
of Social and Economic Development recently prepared a document which distills thirty years of experience that has accumulated in this field since that Office was established at the Bahá’í
World Centre. Among the observations it makes is that efforts
to engage in social action are lent vital impetus by the training
institute. This is not simply through the rise in human resources
it fosters. The spiritual insights, qualities, and abilities that are
cultivated by the institute process have proven to be as crucial
for participation in social action as they are for contributing to
the process of growth. Further, it is explained how the Bahá’í
community’s distinct spheres of endeavor are governed by a
common, evolving, conceptual framework composed of mutually reinforcing elements, albeit these assume varied expressions
in different domains of action. The document we have described
was lately shared with National Spiritual Assemblies, and we
invite them, in consultation with the Counsellors, to consider
how the concepts it explores can help to enhance existing
efforts of social action pursued under their auspices and raise
consciousness of this significant dimension of Bahá’í endeavor.
This should not be interpreted as a general call for widespread
activity in this area—the emergence of social action happens
naturally, as a growing community gathers strength—but it is
timely that the friends reflect more deeply on the implications
of their exertions for the transformation of society. The surge in
learning that is occurring in this field places increased demands
upon the Office of Social and Economic Development, and
steps are being taken to ensure that its functioning evolves
commensurately.
An especially notable feature of the last twelve months
has been the frequency with which the Bahá’í community is
being identified, in a wide variety of contexts, with efforts to
bring about the betterment of society in collaboration with
like-minded people. From the international arena to the grass
165

24.7

24.8

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

24.9

24.10

roots of village life, leaders of thought in all kinds of settings
have expressed their awareness that not only do Bahá’ís have
the welfare of humanity at heart, but they possess a cogent
conception of what needs to be accomplished and effective
means for realizing their aspirations. These expressions of
appreciation and support have also come from some previously
unexpected quarters. For example, even in the Cradle of the
Faith, despite formidable obstacles placed by the oppressor
in their path, the Bahá’ís are increasingly recognized for the
profound implications their message holds for the state of their
nation and respected for their unbending determination to
contribute to the progress of their homeland.
The suffering borne by the faithful in Iran, particularly in
the decades since the most recent wave of persecutions began,
has spurred their brothers and sisters in other countries to
come to their defense. From among the invaluable endowments
which, as a consequence of that endurance, the worldwide
Bahá’í community has acquired, we mention one in this
connection: an impressive network of specialized agencies at
the national level that has proven capable of systematically
developing relations with governments and organizations of
civil society. Parallel to this, the processes of successive Plans
have refined the community’s ability to participate in prevalent
discourses in every space where they occur—from personal
conversations to international forums. At the grass roots, involvement in this kind of endeavor builds naturally, through the
same organic approach that characterizes the steady increase of
the friends’ engagement in social action, and no special attempt
to stimulate it is necessary. At the national level, however, it
is more often becoming the focus of attention for these same
dedicated agencies already functioning in dozens of national
communities, and it is proceeding according to the familiar and
fruitful pattern of action, reflection, consultation, and study. To
enhance such efforts, to facilitate learning in this domain, and
to ensure that steps taken are coherent with the other endeavors
of the Bahá’í community, we have recently established at the
Bahá’í World Centre the Office of Public Discourse. We will
call on it to assist National Spiritual Assemblies in this field by
gradually promoting and coordinating activities and systematizing experience.
Encouraging progress is occurring in other areas as well. In
Santiago, Chile, where the Mother Temple of South America is
166

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

being erected, the building work continues apace. The concrete
construction of the foundations, basement, and service tunnel is
complete, as are the columns that will bear the superstructure.
The anticipation associated with this project is growing, and
a similar sense of expectation is stirring in the seven countries
where national or local Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs are to be raised
up. In each one, preparations have commenced, and the contributions the believers are making to the Temples Fund have
begun to be used; however, practical considerations, such as
location, design, and resources, represent only one aspect of
the work being undertaken by the friends. Fundamentally, theirs
is a spiritual endeavor, one in which the whole community participates. The Master refers to the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár as “the
lodestone of divine confirmations,” “the mighty foundation of
the Lord,” and “the firm pillar of the Faith of God.” Wherever
it is established, it will naturally be an integral component of
the process of community building that surrounds it. Already, in
those places where a House of Worship is to appear, awareness
of this reality is deepening among the rank and file of the
believers, who recognize that their collective life must more
and more reflect that union of worship and service which the
Mashriqu’l-Adhkár embodies.
On each front, then, we see the Bahá’í community moving steadily forward, advancing in understanding, eager to
acquire insights from experience, ready to take on new tasks
when resources make it possible, agile in its response to fresh
imperatives, conscious of the need to ensure coherence among
the various areas of activity in which it is engaged, wholly
dedicated to the fulfillment of its mission. Its enthusiasm and
devotion are apparent in the tremendous fervor generated by
the announcement some two months ago of the convocation of
95 youth conferences throughout the world. We are gratified
not only by the reaction of the youth themselves but also by
the expressions of support voiced by their fellow believers, who
appreciate how the younger followers of Bahá’u’lláh act as a
vital stimulus to the entire body of the Cause.
We are filled with hope by the successive evidences we see
of the spread of Bahá’u’lláh’s message, the reach of its influence,
and the growing awareness of the ideals it enshrines. In this
season of anniversaries, we call to remembrance that “Day of
supreme felicity,” separated from this Rid.ván by a century and a
half, when the Abhá Beauty first proclaimed His Mission to His
167

24.11

24.12

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

companions in the Najíbíyyih Garden. From that sanctified spot,
the Word of God has gone forth to every city and every shore,
summoning humanity to an encounter with its Lord. And from
that initial retinue of God-intoxicated lovers, a diverse community of purpose has blossomed, variegated flowers in the garden
He has reared. With each passing day, rising numbers of newly
awakened souls turn in supplication towards His Shrine, the
place where we, in honor of that blessed Day and in gratitude
for every bounty bestowed upon the community of the Greatest
Name, bow our heads in prayer at the Sacred Threshold.
The Universal House of Justice

168

25
1 May 2013
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
So overwhelming has been the response of the Bahá’í
youth and their friends—indeed, of Bahá’í communities worldwide—to the announcement of 95 conferences to be convened
around the world between July and October, that existing
arrangements now seem unlikely to accommodate the number
of youth wishing to attend, and it is apparent that a further
complement of gatherings is therefore required. With great
joy, we take this opportunity, when the members of National
Spiritual Assemblies are gathered in consultation at the
Eleventh International Bahá’í Convention, to announce today
our decision to convene an additional 19 conferences in the following locations: Bertoua, Bidor, Biratnagar, Brisbane, Cagayan
de Oro, Georgetown (Guyana), Houston, Kampong Thom,
Kigoma, Los Angeles, Mahikeng, Milne Bay, Minneapolis,
Montreal, Nuku’alofa, Nundu (Democratic Republic of the
Congo), Seattle, Vientiane, and Washington, D.C.
This welcome development is indicative of the magnitude
of the reservoirs of energy and devotion that the youth possess.
Every effort must be made to assist them to continue to act
on their responsibilities, and we look to them to expand the
horizons of what the Bahá’í community can accomplish. We
offer thanks to the Blessed Beauty for endowing His youthful
followers with an immense collective capacity for service,
and we beseech Him that it might be realized in benefit to
humankind.
The Universal House of Justice

169

25.1

25.2

26
16 May 2013
To the delegates gathered at
Bahá’í National Conventions
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
The Eleventh International Convention, recently concluded,
offered all who were present a glimpse of the promise of
Bahá’u’lláh to unite the peoples of the world. More than a
thousand members of one hundred and fifty-seven National
Spiritual Assemblies attended, and nearly five hundred more,
including those from an additional fourteen countries, participated in the election by mail. This diverse group of women and
men, a veritable cross section of humanity, evinced, in their
participation in the electoral process and subsequent contributions to the Convention consultations, a spirit of sanctity
and love, a unity of thought and purpose, and a consecration
to the collective enterprise of applying the healing message of
Bahá’u’lláh that earned our deep admiration. No doubt, the
members of your National Assembly, or the Counsellors, will
share with you the joyous fellowship they experienced and the
insights they gained during the productive days spent in the
Holy Land.
You now gather in National Conventions to carry out your
own sacred responsibilities in the Bahá’í Administrative Order.
Foremost is the election of the members of your National
Assembly, when you will choose individuals who can meet
the pressing requirements of the progress of the Cause at the
present stage of its development. Our letter dated 25 March
2007 was intended to strengthen the Bahá’í electoral process,
and we urge you to give renewed consideration to its salient
points. In the features and outcomes of this electoral process
that distinguish it from contemporary practices we find not
limitations, but dawning points of profound implication. The
delegates, as well as the generality of the believers, uphold the
171

26.1

26.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

26.3

26.4

purity of Bahá’í elections, scrupulously avoiding electioneering
or discussion of who should or should not be a member, even
when specific names are not mentioned; for not only does the
Guardian prohibit reference to particular personalities, but
he also states that “we should refrain from influencing the
opinions of others.” Collectively, the friends strive to purge
themselves of every trace of worldly tendencies—pursuit of
personal ambitions, promotion of individuals, contest, and
partisanship—which can corrupt and distort an election’s
­
spiritual character. Delegates are obliged to become “intelligent,
well-informed and responsible” electors so as to “be able to
make a wise choice at the election time.” They enjoy the unfettered right to choose from among all those eligible, whether
it be to retain members or to select new ones. The community
wholeheartedly embraces the result of the election, confident
that the delegates have cast their ballots for those for whom
prayer and reflection have inspired them to vote.
Within the administrative arrangements of the Bahá’í
community there are a number of spaces that allow for the
exchange of views, including cluster reflection gatherings,
institutional meetings, and the Nineteen Day Feast. The
National Convention is another such occasion, but unique in
that it brings together the National Assembly and elected representatives from all parts of the country. The conduct of this
consultative dimension of the Convention calls for thoughtful
attention.
Shoghi Effendi stated that the National Convention should
“fulfill the functions of an enlightened, consultative and
cooperative body that will enrich the experience, enhance the
prestige, support the authority, and assist the deliberations of
the National Spiritual Assembly.” Although delegates are to
offer their views in a full, frank, and unhampered manner, he
advised that time not be spent on problems of secondary importance and that disruptive forces, “which are but the outcome
of human passion and selfishness,” should be resisted. Instead,
the Guardian expected those assembled to “approach their task
with absolute detachment” and “concentrate their attention on
the most important and pressing issues” in order to obtain a
“deeper and broader vision of the Cause through an increase
in the spirit of unity and of wholehearted cooperation.” “The
unfettered freedom of the individual should be tempered with
mutual consultation and sacrifice,” he explained, “and the spirit
172

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

of initiative and enterprise should be reinforced by a deeper
realization of the supreme necessity for concerted action and
a fuller devotion to the common weal.”
Throughout the community, as the processes of the Divine
Plan have become more and more complex, the nature of
discussions on matters pertaining to growth and development
of the Faith has evolved. A distinctive conversation is carried
out, sometimes formally and often informally, at various
levels and in different configurations. In every setting, each
participant, whatever the nature of his or her service, provides a
particular contribution and takes away fresh insight. From this
rich set of interactions about experience unfolding within the
Plan’s framework for action, consensus on strategies and plans
emerges naturally. Among institutions, discussions flourish in an
atmosphere of love and genuine respect, and unity of thought
is readily achieved. And in settings such as cluster reflection
meetings and gatherings of tutors, children’s class teachers,
or animators of junior youth groups arranged by the training
institute, aspects of decision making related to expansion and
consolidation are taken up by the body of the believers, enabling planning and implementation to become more responsive
to local circumstances. This conversation of the Bahá’í world,
grounded in allegiance to Bahá’u’lláh and safeguarded by
firmness in His Covenant, increasingly transcends the habits of
speech characteristic of an age preoccupied with trivial or misdirected interests. With time, accrued experience, and continued
guidance, this ongoing conversation comes to be distinguished
by a more worthy etiquette of expression and gradually clarifies
ambiguities, expands participation, airs concerns, strengthens
bonds of love and association, refocuses endeavor, reconciles
differences, resolves problems, and contributes to happiness
and well-being.
Your consultations with the National Assembly at the
Convention take place within the context of the larger set of
relationships that bind the Plan’s three protagonists and must
increasingly reflect the features of this distinctive conversation.
Each year the Rid.ván message sets the stage for the discussions
at Convention by conveying a sense of the current progress of
the Bahá’í world and the work that lies ahead. Your contribution, though free and frank, is not characterized by insistence
on personal opinion. While there may be a wide range of
important topics, attention to the progress of the Five Year
173

26.5

26.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

26.7

Plan and the requirements of its remaining years cannot be
neglected. You bring to the Convention insights gleaned from
the conversation unfolding within your region. In this way, you
enrich the perspective of the National Assembly and become
informed of its hopes, challenges, and aims. You enhance your
own understanding of the affairs of the Cause from a national
perspective and rededicate yourself to the community’s common enterprise.
We are pleased to witness the promising advances in the
deliberations at National Conventions in recent years, and it is
our ardent prayer that you may arise to achieve the high aims
set forth by the Guardian for this vital institution of the Cause.
The Universal House of Justice

174

27
1 July 2013
To the participants in the forthcoming
114 youth conferences throughout the world
Dearly loved Friends,
When the exalted figure of the Báb, aged just twenty-five,
arose to deliver His revolutionizing message to the world, many
among those who accepted and spread His teachings were
young, even younger than the Báb Himself. Their heroism,
immortalized in all its dazzling intensity in The Dawn-Breakers,
will illumine the annals of human history for centuries to come.
Thus began a pattern in which every generation of youth,
drawing inspiration from the same divine impulse to cast the
world anew, has seized the opportunity to contribute to the
latest stage in the unfolding process that is to transform the life
of humankind. It is a pattern that has suffered no interruption
from the time of the Báb to this present hour.
The lifelong exertion and sacrifice of your spiritual
forebears did much to establish the Faith in diverse lands and
to hasten the appearance of a global community of purpose.
Though the tasks that lie before you are not the same as theirs,
the responsibilities with which you are entrusted are no less
vital. After many a decade, the world-embracing labors of this
far-flung community to obtain a more adequate understanding
of the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh and to apply the principles it
enshrines have culminated in the emergence of a potent framework for action, refined through experience. You are fortunate
to be familiar with its methods and approaches now so well
established. Through perseverance in their implementation,
many of you will already have seen for yourselves signs of the
society-building power of the divine teachings. At the conference you attend, you are being invited to consider the contribution that can be made by any young person who wishes to
answer Bahá’u’lláh’s summons and help to release that power.
175

27.1

27.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

27.3

27.4

27.5

To assist you, a number of themes have been identified for you
to explore, beginning with looking at your current time of life.
Across the world are to be gathered, in scores of youth
conferences sharing the same aim, tens of thousands who have
much in common. Although your realities are shaped by a
broad diversity of circumstances, yet a desire to bring about
constructive change and a capacity for meaningful service, both
characteristic of your stage of life, are neither limited to any
race or nationality, nor dependent upon material means. This
bright period of youth you share is experienced by all—but it is
brief, and buffeted by numerous social forces. How important
it is, then, to strive to be among those who, in the words of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá, “plucked the fruit of life.”
With this in mind, we are delighted that so many of you are
already engaged in service by conducting community-building
activities, as well as by organizing, coordinating, or otherwise
administering the efforts of others; in all of these endeavors
you are taking an increasing level of responsibility upon your
shoulders. Not surprisingly, it is your age group that is gaining
the most experience at aiding junior youth, and children
too, with their moral and spiritual development, fostering in
them capacity for collective service and true friendship. After
all, aware of the world which these young souls will need
to navigate, with its pitfalls and also its opportunities, you
readily appreciate the importance of spiritual strengthening
and preparation. Conscious, as you are, that Bahá’u’lláh came
to transform both the inner life and external conditions of
humanity, you are assisting those younger than yourselves to
refine their characters and prepare to assume responsibility for
the well-being of their communities. As they enter adolescence,
you are helping them to enhance their power of expression, as
well as enabling a strong moral sensibility to take root within
them. In so doing, your own sense of purpose is becoming more
clearly defined as you heed Bahá’u’lláh’s injunction: “Let deeds,
not words, be your adorning.”
To follow a path of service, whatever form one’s activity
assumes, requires faith and tenacity. In this connection, the benefit of walking that path in the company of others is immense.
Loving fellowship, mutual encouragement, and willingness to
learn together are natural properties of any group of youth sincerely striving for the same ends, and should also characterize
those essential relationships that bind together the components
176

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

of society. Given this, we hope the bonds you develop through
association with other conference participants will prove
abiding. Indeed, long after the gatherings close, may these ties
of friendship and common calling help keep your feet firm.
The possibilities presented by collective action are especially evident in the work of community building, a process that
is gaining momentum in many a cluster and in neighborhoods
and villages throughout the world that have become centers of
intense activity. Youth are often at the forefront of the work
in these settings—not only Bahá’í youth, but those of like
mind who can see the positive effects of what the Bahá’ís have
initiated and grasp the underlying vision of unity and spiritual
transformation. In such places, the imperative to share the
Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh with receptive hearts and explore the
implications of His message for today’s world is keenly felt.
When so much of society invites passivity and apathy or, worse
still, encourages behavior harmful to oneself and others, a
conspicuous contrast is offered by those who are enhancing the
capacity of a population to cultivate and sustain a spiritually
enriching pattern of community life.
Yet, although many admire your dynamism and ideals,
the true significance of these endeavors is less apparent to
the world at large. You, however, are aware of your part in a
mighty, transforming process that will yield, in time, a global
civilization reflecting the oneness of humankind. You know
well that the habits of mind and spirit that you are nurturing
in yourselves and others will endure, influencing decisions
of consequence that relate to marriage, family, study, work,
even where to live. Consciousness of this broad context helps
to shatter the distorting looking glass in which everyday
tests, difficulties, setbacks, and misunderstandings can seem
insurmountable. And in the struggles that are common to each
individual’s spiritual growth, the will required to make progress
is more easily summoned when one’s energies are being channeled towards a higher goal—the more so when one belongs to
a community that is united in that goal.
All these thoughts are openings to an inclusive and
ever-­
expanding conversation that will extend through the
conferences and well beyond them as you engage many others
in earnest discussions that lift the heart and awaken the mind
to the possibilities of what could be. Drawing upon your
collective experience will further enrich your deliberations.
177

27.6

27.7

27.8

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

At this ­propitious time, our hearts will be with you, and as
each conference concludes, we will eagerly look to see what
will follow. For every gathering we will entreat the Almighty
to bestow upon its participants a measure of His boundless
grace, knowing, as you do, that divine assistance is promised
to all those who arise to serve humankind in response to the
galvanizing call of Bahá’u’lláh.
The Universal House of Justice

178

28
5 December 2013
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
When He arrived in the Holy Land, exactly one hundred
years ago today, at the conclusion of His “epoch-making journeys” to Egypt and the West, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá eschewed any ceremony or fanfare just as He had at His departure. But between
His going and His return, a defining period in Bahá’í history
had unfolded—a “glorious chapter,” in the words of Shoghi
Effendi, during which “seeds of undreamt-of potentialities”
had been sown, “with the hand of the Center of the Covenant
Himself,” in the “fertile fields” to the west.
The accounts of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s travels and of the effect He
had on those who met Him are legion. Some went to extraordinary lengths to enter His presence—going by boat, by foot, or
even under railway trains—and, by the urgency of their desire
to see Him, imprinted themselves on the consciousness of future
generations of adults and children. The testimonies of those
who were transformed by even a brief, sometimes near wordless
encounter with their beloved Master remain deeply stirring. In
the wide array of visitors He received—rich and poor, black
and white, indigenous and émigré—the universal embrace of
His Father’s Faith was unmistakably in evidence. It is impossible to adequately gauge the full scope of what ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
accomplished within this period. Many of the seeds He planted,
and which He nurtured towards maturity through an extensive
correspondence that He maintained until the end of His life,
would blossom into a steadfast community capable of bearing
the great weight of work in the years to come, supporting the
first structures of national Bahá’í administration and beginning
to act on the Master’s longing that the divine teachings be
brought to every city and shore.

179

28.1

28.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
28.3

The friends have, of course, called these points to mind
during this centenary period, and they have done much more
besides. As we hoped, they have given their attention to
the tasks before them, drawing inspiration from the Master’s
potent example and timeless counsels. We have been pleased
to see how, in particular, efforts to bring spiritual education to
children and young people have flourished. Work to establish
the institution of the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár, the singular significance of which ‘Abdu’l-Bahá stressed so pointedly during His
visit to the United States, is making progress in eight countries,
whilst in every land, devotional meetings—a communal aspect
of the godly life—are thriving. The Bahá’í community’s increasing engagement with the life of society, which is enabling it to
offer a fresh perspective to formal and informal conversations
of all kinds, carries distinct echoes of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s deep
concern for the needs of the age. In clusters where the demands
created by the scale and intensity of activity are most acutely
felt, more complex schemes of coordination are emerging
through a gradual and patient process of learning. In certain regions of the world where the institutions are overseeing special
initiatives, an influx of eager pioneers is helping to strengthen
the foundations of sustained growth and broaden the scope of
what can be achieved by a community. The work of expansion
and consolidation is advancing through the unflagging labors of
countless devoted souls who have, in numerous ways, followed
‘Abdu’l-Bahá in treading the plane of sacrifice. The heightened
capacity of a worldwide community to assist populations
to move towards the vision conceived by Bahá’u’lláh was
conspicuously evident at the Eleventh International Bahá’í
Convention. That same capacity was vividly illustrated in
the film Frontiers of Learning and explored in detail in the
document Insights from the Frontiers of Learning, which have
stimulated profound reflection not only on the dynamics of
growth but also on the means to treat the roots of many a social
malady. And in the closing months of this three-year period
came the most spectacular demonstration of how the present
generation has responded to the call of service to humankind
singularly embodied in the Person of the Master: the gathering
of more than eighty thousand youth in a four-month series of
conferences held in well over a hundred far-strewn locations
across the globe.

180

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Although each possessed its own unique features, all conferences shared essential attributes in common—the meticulous
care that characterized the preparations, the oneness of mind
that was palpable at each gathering, the energy that has surged
therefrom. In the strenuous efforts they made to attend can
be glimpsed the depth of commitment felt by the participants.
Some labored with great sacrifice to raise the necessary funds
from meagre resources; in other cases, by explaining the
noble purpose and wholesome nature of the events, the friends
obtained special permission from the authorities for the arrangements. Shipping lines were persuaded to change course to
collect participants, while some youth walked for days to reach
a venue. Reports of the insights generated, the creativity released, the moving testimonies delivered on each occasion and,
most of all, the impetus lent to acts of service are evidence that
those present were touched by spiritual forces more enduring,
more deeply rooted than anything that could be elicited by the
thrill of fellowship and large numbers alone. It is most heartening that tens of thousands of youth, unwilling to succumb
to triviality or to settle for easy conformity, have now been
brought within the widening embrace of a conversation and
pattern of action of far-reaching consequence regarding how to
live a coherent life and be an agent of spiritual and social transformation. The new levels of collaboration these conferences
demanded of the institutions to mobilize and guide such large
numbers and prepare the host of facilitators to assist them; the
wholehearted collective effort required of the community as it
threw wide open the circle of participation and witnessed the
profound effect of doing so; the serious commitment evinced
by the individual who, drawing on the concepts explored in the
conference materials, is joining the tens of thousands occupied
with reaching out to hundreds of thousands of others—these,
together, have contributed to a marked rise in capacity in the
three protagonists upon whom the success of the Five Year Plan
depends. And while we acknowledge that the youth are at the
forefront of this advance, its distinguishing feature is that the
community rose as one to support, encourage, and champion
this phenomenon, and now rejoices to see itself progress as an
interdependent, organic whole, readier to meet the imperatives
of this day.

181

28.4

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
28.5

28.6

Given all this, we have no hesitation in recognizing that
what these developments reveal is an advance in the process of
entry by troops of a kind not experienced heretofore.
We call upon all to reflect upon the significance of the
endeavor in which the community of the Greatest Name is
engaged, the purpose of which the Master strove to underline so
often in the course of His travels, and to rededicate themselves
to contribute their share to its outcome. “Try with all your
hearts,” He urged one audience, “to be willing channels for
God’s Bounty. For I say unto you that He has chosen you to be
His messengers of love throughout the world, to be His bearers
of spiritual gifts to man, to be the means of spreading unity and
concord on the earth.” “Perchance,” He remarked on another
occasion, “God willing, this terrestrial world may become as
a celestial mirror upon which we may behold the imprint of
the traces of Divinity, and the fundamental qualities of a new
creation may be reflected from the reality of love shining in
human hearts.” To this end do all your efforts tend. During the
second half of the Five Year Plan, the society-building power of
the Faith must be released within thousands of clusters where
programs of growth need to be initiated, reinforced, or extended. The challenge for Bahá’í institutions and their agencies
will be to furnish the means to accompany all those who cherish
a pure and earnest desire for a better world, whatever their
degree of involvement in the process of spiritual education so
far, and help them translate that desire into the practical steps
that day by day and week by week accrete to build vibrant,
flourishing communities. How fitting that, at this hour, a generation of youth has come into its own, ready to assume growing
responsibility, since its contribution to the work at hand will
prove decisive in the months and years ahead. In our prayers at
the Sacred Threshold, we will entreat the Almighty to sustain
all those who would be a part of this immense undertaking,
who prefer the true prosperity of others over their own ease
and leisure, and whose eyes are fixed upon ‘Abdu’l-Bahá for
a flawless pattern of how to be; all this, that “those who walk
in darkness should come into the light” and “those who are
excluded should join the inner circle of the Kingdom.”
The Universal House of Justice

182

29
29 January 2014
To the Bahá’í youth in the Cradle of the Faith,
Almost a year has passed since we called the Bahá’í youth
throughout the world to a higher recognition of the significant
contribution they are to make to the regeneration of the world
and the unity of its peoples, and invited them to join those in
the vanguard of service to humankind. In doing so they were
asked to recognize that countless other young people aspire to
the same vision of unity, justice, and prosperity by which they
themselves have been galvanized. To consider this critical
responsibility, we encouraged them to participate together with
their close friends in an unprecedented series of 114 conferences
spanning the globe.
The conferences were an occasion for the participants to
reflect on the astonishing powers and unique capacities associated with the period of youth and to consider deeply those
societal forces that exert themselves on the youth—forces that
aim to distract them from significant social change, weaken
their commitment to service, ensnare them in consumerism, and
dissuade them from belief in their own God-given capacity and
that of others. The participants considered, too, practical ways
in which to counter those effects, build bonds of friendship
and profound connection, promote unity, and equip themselves
with the concepts needed to succeed in constructing a new
world through collective endeavor.
The admirable response of the Bahá’í youth and thousands
of their friends offered another glimpse of the fulfillment of
Bahá’u’lláh’s hope that in the heyday of life and their prime of
youth souls would arise in service. By any measure—the strenuous and at times heroic efforts they made to attend, the depth
of understanding and insight they attained, or the enthusiasm
and determination they demonstrated to transform their world

183

29.1

29.2

29.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

29.4

29.5

29.6

and serve their society—the initial outcome of these gatherings
was extraordinary.
You have certainly heard the news of these conferences and
may indeed have seen the beautiful images and films from the
gatherings; you may even have had the chance to study with
others the concepts and themes that were the central feature
of the gatherings. Undoubtedly you will derive a fresh measure of energy and zeal as you reflect on these concepts and
consider the implications they hold for your lives and for your
circumstances.
As the valiant youth in the Cradle of the Faith, you are well
aware of your mission to be a source of hope to those around
you, to be channels of love and affection, to be symbols of forgiveness and patience, of serenity and strength to your compatriots, and above all, to be in the front ranks of that process by
which the worldwide community has learned to build capacity
for service, heighten unity, deepen understanding, and hone
abilities so that purposeful action for the benefit of mankind
may ensue. Through the spiritual and social transformation
thus promoted, the Bahá’í world has come to realize that
what is being cultivated is a process that enhances orientation
to service and commitment to the application of the divine
precepts—a process that holds far-reaching implications for
the life of the individual and for the betterment of the world.
We know, of course, the privations and limitations under
which you labor. Whether in pursuing your education, earning
a livelihood, working towards your legitimate aspirations,
or practicing your faith, your freedoms are curtailed by
many an injustice. From the very beginning the compatriots
of Bahá’u’lláh have shared in the suffering He sustained. You
are the embodiments of these words of the Master: “Thou didst
follow in the footsteps of the Blessed Beauty and didst drink
a cup from the ocean of His tribulations.” But you know, too,
that it is precisely your staunchness that lends such lustre to the
qualities your community exhibits. You may be sure that it is
not only history that tells of the courage and steadfastness of
your community, but that the significance of a community that
under severe and sustained oppression has remained forward
looking, dynamic, vibrant, and committed to serve its society, is
not lost on those who dispassionately view your present
situation. Perhaps the most compelling and clear example of
your constructive resilience is evident currently in your earnest
184

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

striving for knowledge, in your commitment to the loftiest
values of faith and reason which the Cause inculcates, and in
your perseverance in pursuit of higher education. The world can
see a community that has rejected the label of victim and chosen
instead to draw on the highest reservoirs of solidarity and
collaboration in its resolve to advance as a living entity—that
its youth might progress and attain the heights of learning and
that society itself benefit therefrom.
“The world is in travail, and its agitation waxeth day by
day.” With these words did the Ancient Beauty warn humankind about its immediate future. “Its face is turned towards
waywardness and unbelief. Such shall be its plight, that to
disclose it now would not be meet and seemly.” You surely see
how throughout the world the light of true religion is fading.
Yet, you are the very examples of what illumination this light
can bring. You are living proofs that religion promotes upright
character, instills forbearance, compassion, forgiveness, magnanimity, high-mindedness. It prohibits harm to others and invites
souls to the plane of sacrifice, that they may give of themselves
for the good of others. It imparts a world-embracing vision
and cleanses the heart from self-centeredness and prejudice.
It inspires souls to build unity, to endeavor for material and
spiritual betterment for all, to see their own happiness in that of
others, to advance learning and science, to be an instrument of
true joy, and to revive the body of humankind. It burnishes the
mirror of the soul until it reflects the qualities of the spirit with
which it has been endowed. And then the power of the divine
attributes is manifested in the individual and collective lives of
humanity and aids the emergence of a new social order. Such
is the true conception of religion set forth in the Teachings of
Bahá’u’lláh. Praised be God that you are ever striving to model
your lives after the sublime pattern enshrined in His Teachings.
We offer supplications at the Sacred Threshold on your
behalf.
The Universal House of Justice

185

29.7

29.8

30
Rid.ván 2014
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
A full three years have passed since the inception of the
current stage in the unfoldment of the Divine Plan, an undertaking that binds together the followers of Bahá’u’lláh in one
united spiritual endeavor. Just two years separate the friends of
God from its fixed conclusion. The two essential movements
which continue to propel the process of growth—the steady
flow of participants through the sequence of training institute
courses and the movement of clusters along a continuum of
development—have both been immensely reinforced by the
outpouring of energy released at the youth conferences held last
year. The expanded capacity the Bahá’í world has acquired for
mobilizing large numbers of young people in the field of service
can now yield further fruit. For in the time that remains, the
critical tasks of strengthening existing programs of growth and
beginning new ones urgently beckon. The community of the
Greatest Name is well positioned, before the expiration of this
period, to add to the clusters where such programs have already
emerged the two thousand that remain of the goal.
How glad we are to see that this endeavor is being vigorously advanced across the far-flung regions of the globe, and
in a diversity of circumstances and settings, in clusters already
numbering some three thousand. Many clusters are at a point
where momentum is being generated through the implementation of a few simple lines of action. In others, after successive
cycles of activity, the number of individuals taking initiative
within the framework of the Plan has increased and the pitch of
activity intensified; as the quality of the process of spiritual education is enhanced through experience, souls are more readily
attracted to participate in it. From time to time, there may be
a lull in activity or an obstacle to the way forward; searching
187

30.1

30.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

30.3

consultation on the reasons for the impasse, combined with
patience, courage, and perseverance, enables momentum to be
regained. In more and more clusters, the program of growth
is increasing in scope and complexity, commensurate with the
rising capacity of the Plan’s three protagonists—the individual,
the community, and the institutions of the Faith—to create
a mutually supportive environment. And we are delighted
that, as anticipated, there are a growing number of clusters
where a hundred or more individuals are now facilitating the
engagement of a thousand or more in weaving a pattern of life,
spiritual, dynamic, transformative. Underlying the process even
from the start is, of course, a collective movement towards the
vision of material and spiritual prosperity set forth by Him
Who is the Lifegiver of the World. But when such large numbers
are involved, the movement of an entire population becomes
discernible.
This movement is especially in evidence in those clusters
where a local Mashriqu’l-Adhkár is to be established. One such,
by way of example, is in Vanuatu. The friends who reside on
the island of Tanna have made a supreme effort to raise consciousness of the planned House of Worship, and have already
engaged no less than a third of the island’s 30,000 inhabitants
in an expanding conversation about its significance in a variety
of ways. The ability to sustain an elevated conversation among
so many people has been refined through years of experience
sharing the teachings of Bahá’u’lláh and extending the reach of
a vibrant training institute. Junior youth groups on the island
are particularly thriving, urged on by the support of village
chiefs who see how the participants are spiritually empowered.
Encouraged by the unity and dedication that exist among
them, these young people have not only dispelled the languor
of passivity in themselves but have, through various practical
projects, found means to work for the betterment of their
community, and as a result, those of all ages, not least their
own parents, have been galvanized into constructive action.
Among the believers and the wider society, the bounty of being
able to turn to a Local Spiritual Assembly for guidance and for
the resolution of difficult situations is being recognized, and in
turn, the decisions of the Spiritual Assemblies are increasingly
characterized by wisdom and sensitivity. There is much here
to indicate that, when the elements of the Plan’s framework for
action are combined into a coherent whole, the impact on a
188

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

population can be profound. And it is against the background
of ongoing expansion and consolidation—the thirtieth cycle of
the intensive program of growth has recently concluded—that
the friends are actively exploring, with the rest of the island’s
inhabitants, what it means for a Mashriqu’l-Adhkár, a “collective center for men’s souls,” to be raised up in their midst. With
the active support of traditional leaders, Tanna islanders have
offered no less than a hundred design ideas for the Temple,
demonstrating the extent to which the House of Worship has
captured imaginations, and opening up enthralling prospects
for the influence it is set to exert on the lives lived beneath its
shade.
This heartening account has its counterpart in numerous
advanced clusters where the implications of Bahá’u’lláh’s
teachings are being brought to bear on the conditions of life
in neighborhoods and villages. In each, a people, increasingly
aware of the Person of Bahá’u’lláh, is learning, through reflection on experience, consultation, and study, how to act on the
truths enshrined in His Revelation, such that the widening circle
of spiritual kindred is ever more closely bound together by ties
of collective worship and service.
In many ways, the communities that have progressed
furthest are tracing an inviting path for others to follow. Yet
whatever the level of activity in a cluster, it is the capacity for
learning among the local friends, within a common framework,
that fosters progress along the path of development. Everyone
has a share in this enterprise; the contribution of each serves to
enrich the whole. The most dynamic clusters are those in which,
irrespective of the resources the community possesses or the
number of activities being undertaken, the friends appreciate
that their task is to identify what is required for progress to
occur—the nascent capacity that must be nurtured, the new
skill that must be acquired, the initiators of a fledgling effort
who must be accompanied, the space for reflection that must
be cultivated, the collective endeavor that must be coordinated—and then find creative ways in which the necessary time
and resources can be made available to achieve it. The very
fact that each set of circumstances presents its own challenges
is enabling every community not simply to benefit from what
is being learned in the rest of the Bahá’í world but also to
add to that body of knowledge. Awareness of this reality frees
one from the fruitless search for a rigid formula for action
189

30.4

30.5

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

30.6

while still allowing the insights gleaned in diverse settings to
inform the process of growth as it takes a particular shape in
one’s own surroundings. This entire approach is completely at
odds with narrow conceptions of “success” and “failure” that
breed freneticism or paralyze volition. Detachment is needed.
When effort is expended wholly for the sake of God then all
that occurs belongs to Him and every victory won in His Name
is an occasion to celebrate His praise.
So much in the Writings of our Faith describes the relationship between effort exerted and the heavenly aid vouchsafed in
response: “If only ye exert the effort,” is the Master’s reassurance in one of His Tablets, “it is certain that these splendors will
shine out, these clouds of mercy will shed down their rain, these
life-giving winds will rise and blow, this sweet-smelling musk
will be scattered far and wide.” In our frequent visits to the
Holy Shrines, we earnestly entreat the Almighty on your behalf
that He may sustain and strengthen you, that your endeavors to
reach out to those yet unacquainted with the divine teachings
and confirm them in His Cause may be richly blessed, and
that your reliance on His limitless favors may be unwavering.
Never are you absent from our prayers, and never will we cease
remembering in our supplications your consecrated acts of
faithfulness. As we contemplate the imperatives that lie before
the followers of the Blessed Beauty over the next two years, the
Master’s emphatic call to action is a spur to the spirit: “Tear
asunder the veils, remove the obstacles, proffer the life-giving
waters, and point out the path of salvation.”
The Universal House of Justice

190

31
10 July 2014
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
The setting of the sun on 20 March 2015 will signalize
the end of the year 171, the close of the ninth Váh.id of the
first Kull-i-Shay’ of the Bahá’í Era. We call upon the Bahá’ís of
the East and West to adopt, on that auspicious occasion, the
provisions that will unite them in the common implementation
of the Badí‘ calendar.
In keeping with the principle governing the gradual
unfoldment and progressive application of the Teachings, the
provisions of the Badí‘ calendar have been set forth over time.
The Báb introduced the calendar and its broad pattern of periods and cycles, months and days. Bahá’u’lláh provided essential
clarifications and additions. Aspects were elucidated by ‘Abdu’lBahá, and arrangements for its adoption in the West were put
in place at the direction of Shoghi Effendi, as described in the
volumes of The Bahá’í World. Still, ambiguities surrounding
some Islamic and Gregorian dates, as well as difficulties in the
correlation of historical observances and astronomical events
with explicit statements in the Text, left certain issues unresolved. When responding to questions concerning the calendar,
both ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi left these matters to the
Universal House of Justice. Of its many features, three require
clarification for the calendar’s uniform application: the means
for the determination of Naw-Rúz, the accommodations of the
lunar character of the Twin Holy Birthdays within the solar
year, and the fixing of the dates of the Holy Days within the
Badí‘ calendar.
“The Festival of Naw-Rúz falleth on the day that the sun
entereth the sign of Aries,” Bahá’u’lláh explains in His Most
Holy Book, “even should this occur no more than one minute
before sunset.” However, details have, until now, been left
191

31.1

31.2

31.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

31.4

31.5

31.6

undefined. We have decided that T.ihrán, the birthplace of the
Abhá Beauty, will be the spot on the earth that will serve as the
standard for determining, by means of astronomical computations from reliable sources, the moment of the vernal equinox
in the northern hemisphere and thereby the day of Naw-Rúz
for the Bahá’í world.
The Festivals of the Twin Birthdays, the Birth of the Báb
and the Birth of Bahá’u’lláh, have, in the East, been traditionally observed according to their correspondence to the first and
second days of Muh.arram in the Islamic calendar. “These two
days are accounted as one in the sight of God,” Bahá’u’lláh
­affirms. Yet, a letter written on behalf of the Guardian states,
“In the future, no doubt all of the Holy Days will follow the
Solar calendar, and provisions be made as to how the Twin
Festivals will be celebrated universally.” How to satisfy the
intrinsic lunar character of these blessed Days within the
context of a solar calendar has hitherto been unanswered. We
have decided that they will now be observed on the first and the
second day following the occurrence of the eighth new moon
after Naw-Rúz, as determined in advance by astronomical
tables using T.ihrán as the point of reference. This will result
in the observance of the Twin Birthdays moving, year to year,
within the months of Mashíyyat, ‘Ilm, and Qudrat of the Badí‘
calendar, or from mid-October to mid-November according
to the Gregorian calendar. Next year, the Birth of the Báb will
occur on 10 Qudrat and the Birth of Bahá’u’lláh on 11 Qudrat.
With joy and eager anticipation, we look to the upcoming
bicentennial anniversaries of the Birth of Bahá’u’lláh and the
Birth of the Báb, in 174 and 176 B.E., respectively, which the
entire Bahá’í world will celebrate according to a common
calendar.
The dates of the remaining Holy Days will be fixed within
the solar calendar in accordance with explicit statements of
Bahá’u’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, and Shoghi Effendi; we have decided
to set aside certain discrepancies in the historical record. The
dates are: Naw-Rúz, 1 Bahá; the Festival of Rid.ván, 13 Jalál to
5 Jamál; the Declaration of the Báb, 8 ‘Az.amat; the Ascension
of Bahá’u’lláh, 13 ‘Az. amat; the Martyrdom of the Báb,
17 Rah.mat; the Day of the Covenant, 4 Qawl; and the
Ascension of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, 6 Qawl.
Unless specifically abrogated by these new provisions,
previous guidance and clarifications pertaining to the calendar
192

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

and the observance of the Nineteen Day Feast and Holy Days
remain binding, such as the beginning of the day at sunset, the
suspension of work, and the hours at which certain Holy Days
are commemorated. In future, a change in circumstances may
well require additional measures.
It will be evident from the decisions delineated that Bahá’ís
of both East and West will find some elements of the calendar
to be different from those to which they have been accustomed.
The alignment of the dates of the Badí‘ calendar with other
calendars will shift depending on the occurrence of Naw-Rúz.
The number of days of Ayyám-i-Há will vary according to
the timing of the vernal equinox in successive years; the year
commencing on Naw-Rúz 172 B.E. will include four such days.
A table prepared at the Bahá’í World Centre that sets out the
dates for Naw-Rúz and the Twin Holy Birthdays covering half
a century will be provided to all National Spiritual Assemblies
in due course.
The adoption of a new calendar in each dispensation is a
symbol of the power of Divine Revelation to reshape human
perception of material, social, and spiritual reality. Through it,
sacred moments are distinguished, humanity’s place in time and
space reimagined, and the rhythm of life recast. Next Naw-Rúz
will mark yet another historic step in the manifestation of the
unity of the people of Bahá and the unfoldment of Bahá’u’lláh’s
World Order.
The Universal House of Justice

193

31.7

31.8

32
1 August 2014
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
Over two years have elapsed since our announcement at
Rid.ván 2012 of projects to raise two national and five local
Houses of Worship, to be pursued in conjunction with the
construction in Santiago, Chile, of the last of the continental
Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs. These undertakings, inextricably linked to
the development of community life now being fostered everywhere through acts of devotion and service, are further steps
in the sublime task entrusted to humanity by Bahá’u’lláh to
build Houses of Worship “throughout the lands in the name of
Him Who is the Lord of all religions”—centers in which souls
may gather “harmoniously attuned one to another” to hear the
divine verses and to offer supplications, and from which “the
voices of praise may rise to the Kingdom” and the “fragrance
of God” be diffused.
We are deeply moved by the response in every part of the
world to our call. Particularly in the nations and localities
recently designated for the construction of a House of Worship,
we have witnessed the friends’ spontaneous expressions of
joy; their immediate and heartfelt commitment to lend their
share in carrying out the critical work at hand and to increase
the dynamism of those activities integral to the emergence
of a Mashriqu’l-Adhkár within a population; their sacrificial
contributions of time, energy, and material resources, in a
variety of forms; and their sustained efforts to awaken growing
contingents to the vision of those edifices dedicated wholly to
the remembrance of God that will be founded in their midst.
Indeed, the ready response of the community of the Greatest
Name augurs well for its ability to further these collective
undertakings.

195

32.1

32.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
32.3

32.4

32.5

The National Spiritual Assemblies of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Papua New Guinea as well as those
of Cambodia, Colombia, India, Kenya, and Vanuatu, with the
close support of the Office of Temples and Sites created at the
Bahá’í World Centre in 2012, promptly moved forward with
the initial preparations. A committee was formed in each country, entrusted with identifying, together with institutions and
agencies at all levels of the community, means to promote widespread participation and to channel the enthusiasm engendered
among the friends following the announcement of the projects.
Another practical step in these national and local projects
has been the selection of a suitable piece of land, one which
is modest in size, strategically located, and easily accessible.
Four of the seven properties are now in hand. A construction
office for each project is being established to assist with the
management of technical, financial, and legal issues. The work
involved in the opening stage has advanced through generous
contributions from the friends all over the world to the Temples
Fund. Universal and sacrificial support for this Fund will ensure
the steady progress of the next phases.
In four countries, the projects have reached the stage of
preparing a design for the Temple edifice. This begins with the
selection of potential architects and the formulation of an architectural brief defining the requirements for the structure, and
it ultimately results in a contract for the final design. Architects
are presented with the singular challenge of designing Temples
“as perfect as is possible in the world of being” that harmonize
naturally with the local culture and the daily lives of those
who will gather to pray and meditate therein. The task calls for
creativity and skill to combine beauty, grace, and dignity with
modesty, functionality, and economy. A number of architects
from near and far have gladly offered their services, and
while such contributions are of course welcomed, National
Assemblies are giving due regard to the value of engaging
architects who are well acquainted with the area where the
edifice will be built.
The erection of the continental House of Worship for
South America is moving towards its completion in Chile. The
steel-frame superstructure has been almost entirely installed, the
placement of the interior translucent stone panels is under way,
and the landscaping and the construction of auxiliary facilities
are progressing according to schedule. The friends in Santiago,
196

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

supported by others from throughout the Americas, have been
diligently striving to prepare the surrounding population for
the emergence of the House of Worship; increasing numbers
are participating in the community-building endeavors, and a
stream of visitors are being welcomed to the Temple site for
prayer and discussion on the practical and spiritual dimensions
of the enterprise. Measures are currently being put in place in
that country in anticipation of the many demands that are sure
to arise once the Temple is inaugurated in 2016.
As the friends worldwide rejoice in these heartening advances, their energies remain focused on the processes gaining
strength in cluster after cluster. In this, they have not failed
to appreciate the dynamic interaction between worship and endeavors to uplift the spiritual, social, and material conditions of
society. May all those who are thus laboring in towns and cities,
neighborhoods and villages, derive insights from the exertions
made to raise up the first two Houses of Worship at the turn of
the twentieth century, in the East and then in the West.
In the city of ‘Ishqábád, a devoted band of believers who
settled from Persia, and who, for a time, found peace and tranquillity in Turkistán, bent their energies towards the creation
of a pattern of life that would reflect the exalted spiritual and
social principles enshrined in the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh. In
a span of a few decades, this group, originally consisting of a
handful of families, was joined there by others and grew to a
few thousand believers. This community, fortified by ties of
camaraderie and animated by unity of purpose and a spirit of
faithfulness, was enabled to reach a high degree of cohesiveness
and development, for which it gained renown throughout the
Bahá’í world. These friends, guided by their understanding of
the divine Teachings, and within the bounds of the religious
freedom they were accorded, toiled to create the conditions
that would lead to the founding of a Mashriqu’l-Adhkár,
that “crowning institution in every Bahá’í community.” On a
befitting tract of land in the center of the city that had been obtained some years before with the consent of the Blessed Beauty
Himself, facilities were built for communal well-being—a meeting hall, schools for children, a hostel for visitors, and a small
clinic, among others. A sign of the notable achievements of the
Bahá’ís in ‘Ishqábád, who in those productive years became
distinguished for their prosperity, magnanimity, and intellectual
and cultural attainments, was their attention to ensuring that
197

32.6

32.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

32.8

all Bahá’í children and youth were literate in a society with
rampant illiteracy, especially among girls. Within such an environment of unified endeavor and progress, and fostered at every
stage of development by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, a magnificent House of
Worship emerged—the most prominent edifice in the area. For
over twenty years, the friends experienced the heavenly joy of
having realized their lofty aim: the establishment of a focal
point of worship, a nerve center of community life, a place
where souls gathered at daybreak for humble invocation and
communion before flowing out of its doors to engage in their
daily pursuits. While the forces of irreligion eventually swept
through the region and thwarted hopes, the brief appearance of
a Mashriqu’l-Adhkár in ‘Ishqábád is an enduring testament to
the volition and effort of a body of believers who established
a rich pattern of life deriving its impetus from the power of the
Creative Word.
In the Western Hemisphere, shortly after work commenced
on the House of Worship in ‘Ishqábád, the members of the
nascent Bahá’í community in North America were galvanized
to demonstrate their faith and devotion by constructing a
Temple of their own, and they wrote in 1903 to seek the
Master’s consent. From that moment, the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár
became inseparably intertwined with the fate of those dedicated
servants of Bahá’u’lláh. While progress on this complex project
was obstructed over decades by the effects of two world
wars and a widespread economic depression, each stage in
its development was intimately tied to the expansion of the
community and the unfoldment of its administration. On the
same day as the interment of the sacred remains of the Báb on
Mount Carmel in March 1909, delegates gathered to establish
the Bahá’í Temple Unity, a national organization whose elected
Board became the nucleus of the far-flung local communities of
the continent. This development soon gave rise to the formation
of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the United
States and Canada. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá Himself laid the cornerstone
of the building during His travels to North America, endowing
the Mother Temple of the West with tremendous spiritual potentialities. And contributions for this historic enterprise flowed
from Bahá’í centers in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America,
and the Pacific—a demonstration of the solidarity and sacrifice
of the Bahá’ís of the East and West.

198

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

As the followers of Bahá’u’lláh in every land center their
thoughts on God and occupy themselves each day with His
remembrance, ceaselessly exerting effort in His Name, let
them draw inspiration from these stirring words addressed by
‘Abdu’l-Bahá to a believer who was devoted to building the first
House of Worship, raised under His close and loving direction:

32.9

Hasten now to ‘Ishqábád, in the utmost detachment and
aflame with the fire of attraction, and convey to the friends
of God ardent greetings from ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. Kiss thou each
one’s face and express this servant’s deep and sincere affection to all. Do thou on behalf of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá move the
earth, carry the mortar, and haul the stones for the building
of the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár so that the rapture of this service
may bring joy and gladness to the Center of Servitude. That
Mashriqu’l-Adhkár is the first visible and manifest establishment of the Lord. Therefore, it is this servant’s hope that
each and every virtuous and righteous soul will sacrifice
his all, evince great happiness and exultation, and rejoice
in carrying the earth and mortar so that this Divine Edifice
may be raised, the Cause of God may spread, and in every
corner of the world the friends may arise with the utmost
resolve to accomplish this great task. Were ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
not imprisoned and were there not obstacles in his path, he
himself would assuredly hasten to ‘Ishqábád and carry the
earth for the building of the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár with the
utmost joy and gladness. It behoveth the friends now to
arise with this intention in mind and serve in my place so
that in a short time this Edifice may be revealed to all eyes,
the loved ones of God may engage in making mention of the
Abhá Beauty, the melodies of the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár may
rise at dawntide to the Concourse on high, and the songs
of the nightingales of God may bring joy and ecstasy to
the denizens of the All-Glorious Realm. Thus will the hearts
rejoice, the souls delight in joyful tidings, and the minds be
illumined. This is the highest hope of the sincere ones; this
is the dearest wish of them that are nigh unto God.

32.10

The Universal House of Justice

199

33
1 October 2014
To the Bahá’ís of Iran,
Papua New Guinea comprises a group of islands in the
vast expanse of the waters of the Pacific, far, far away from
the Cradle of the Faith. We recently learned that your sacrifices
have so inspired the believers in that vibrant Bahá’í community
in their highly energetic response to the exigencies of the Five
Year Plan that a group of them are working to make a television
program to bring to the attention of their compatriots the suffering that their deeply cherished fellow believers in Iran endure
because of their adherence to the Cause. In so many ways that
extraordinary region, Australasia—where, before long, four
Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs will shine out as beacons of the light of
divine guidance and as testaments to the magnificent response
of its population to Bahá’u’lláh’s call for unity and peace—is
the embodiment of this emphatic promise by the Abhá Beauty
regarding His Cause: “Should they attempt to conceal its light
on the continent, it will assuredly rear its head in the midmost
heart of the ocean, and, raising its voice, proclaim: ‘I am the
life-giver of the world!’”
To be sure, there are those who wish to conceal this light—
indeed to snuff it out—in the land where it was first kindled
and shrink at nothing to this end. In recent months, there has
been a marked increase in calumnies and lies, misinformation
and untruths about the Cause. How utterly futile are their
efforts! For the expenditure of energy and fortune on systematic
campaigns to propagate falsehoods about your beliefs has, as
you know, led to an upsurge in interest to study the Bahá’í
teachings and its history.
Consider for a moment the reason for the rise in this
interest. It is, of course, a well-known fact that when searching
for the truth of a matter, one cannot limit oneself to the study
of the statements of its detractors; for an unbiased judgment,
201

33.1

33.2

33.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

33.4

33.5

the original source must be investigated. Consider what lies and
calumnies have for 1,400 years been propagated by the enemies
of Islam. Is the truth of the Faith of the Prophet Muh.ammad to
be judged by the protestations of His enemies or by immersion
in and reflection on the ocean of the sacred Word revealed to
Him by God?
Regrettably, in your land, truth has become a flexible plaything in the hands of those who are drunk on worldly power. So
institutionalized has lying become in official circles that statements made by the authorities increasingly lack any credibility.
This is in sharp contrast to the way in which your compatriots
are able, with growing clarity, to see and understand your
posture. For the sake of upholding the truth and not uttering
a simple false statement about your belief that would open up
to you every social and economic opportunity, you maintain
your integrity and refuse to deny or dissimulate your faith.
Among your fellow citizens and on the international stage, this
commitment to truthfulness has won for you high standing
and immeasurable praise. Little wonder, then, that some of
those who attack the Faith in the virtual space now pretend
to speak in the voice of the Bahá’ís. Knowing that the words
of your avowed adversaries are devoid of any credibility, these
hapless antagonists attempt to sow dissension in your midst
by commandeering your voice so as to use its moral authority,
won by your honesty, to undermine your unity. This effort is so
transparent that none take it seriously, but it is an indication
of the desperation and frustration of those who oppose you.
This same deceitful attitude is in evidence in the manner
in which Bahá’í youth are denied higher education. Every year
a new ruse is used to deceive; this year was no exception. But
the diligence with which the Bahá’í youth in Iran, despite every
obstacle, continue to pursue justice and seek knowledge has
again won the admiration of the people of the world and their
governments. Whether in the determination and integrity of the
young student who, having passed the entrance exam, demands
evidence to know why she is being denied her right to higher
education; whether in the heartrending lines written by a child
in defense of her sister against manifest injustice; whether in the
fearless audacity and resolve evinced by the concerned father
who travels hundreds of miles to set forth the truth to those
in seats of power; or whether in the gestures of support and
solidarity from your compatriots—in all your countless other
202

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

unmarked acts of fidelity and steadfastness, as well as in acts
of nobility and valor on the part of the people of Iran, a unique
and instructive account is being written in deeds.
Yet your actions are not confined to efforts to seek justice.
Your unrelenting pursuit of knowledge is perhaps one of the
most outstanding examples of constructive resilience in the
modern age. In a world where education is not immune from
the forces that promote a materialistic conception of human
life, and where, for some, university degrees have become
commoditized, your admirable pursuit of learning for its own
sake, for the sake of the powers of the human mind that it
enhances and the capacities for service that it develops, stands
in sharp contrast. But what is all the more remarkable is that
this attitude, this understanding, this value you rightfully attach
to learning is not confined to a certain small section of your
community. The imperative to educate is a central concern for
your young and old alike; for the students, certainly, but also
for those who risk their all to teach and impart knowledge, for
those who organize educational endeavors, for those parents
who sacrificially ensure their children are able to continue their
education, for those who generously offer hospitality, for those
who pray for this effort and wish it well, and for countless
others who in a myriad other ways make this collective act
possible. This resolute spirit and these selfless deeds deserve the
highest praise.
Reflect upon the destructive forces at work that are destabilizing equilibrium across the face of the globe, including the
situation that prevails in your own land. Power is seized and
exercised in a manner that twists or obscures the truth to serve
the special interests of the few at the expense of the many.
Fanaticism is unleashed in the name of religion, such that it
distorts human behavior and promotes social strife in a manner
that stands in stark contrast to the spiritual qualities and social
well-being which the Messengers of God sacrificed themselves
to foster. Materialism dulls the human spirit, trapping that bird,
which should soar in the heavens, in the mire of self-indulgence
and animalistic tendencies. As human beings are buffeted by
these forces, they long for truth and that which is right and
become impelled to discover a way out of this morass. Inspired
by the teachings of Bahá’u’lláh, you stand against such negative
forces, you respond to this search for truth, and together with
others of like mind you serve the process of the construction of
203

33.6

33.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

33.8

a just and peaceful world. Praised be God that you are engaged
in carrying out the admonitions of your Beloved. Continue
then with confidence on your path. Challenged by self-serving
power, pursue the acquisition of knowledge; in the face of
fanaticism, build unity, and combat prejudices of all kinds; in
response to enmity and hatred, offer love and show mercy and
compassion; rather than surrendering to consumerism, live a
selfless life of service and use your resources for the betterment
of the world. Consort in fellowship and work with all who
strive for these noble aims.
This prayer of the Master describes well your state and
expresses the sentiments of our hearts:
O Divine Providence! This assemblage is composed
of Thy friends who are attracted to Thy beauty and are
set ablaze by the fire of Thy love. Turn these souls into
heavenly angels, resuscitate them through the breath of
Thy Holy Spirit, grant them eloquent tongues and resolute
hearts, bestow upon them heavenly power and merciful
susceptibilities, cause them to become the promulgators of
the oneness of mankind and the cause of love and concord
in the world of humanity, so that the perilous darkness of
ignorant prejudice may vanish through the light of the Sun
of Truth, this dreary world may become illumined, this
material realm may absorb the rays of the world of spirit,
these different colors may merge into one color and the
melody of praise may rise to the kingdom of Thy sanctity.
Verily, Thou art the Omnipotent and the Almighty!
The Universal House of Justice

204

34
Rid.ván 2015
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
The resplendent season of Rid.ván is at hand, and from
the heights to which the community of the Greatest Name has
attained, bright prospects are visible on the horizon. A vast
terrain has been traversed: new programs of growth have appeared, and while hundreds more must still emerge in the next
twelve months, efforts to set in motion the necessary pattern of
activity have already begun in almost every one of the clusters
required to reach the 5,000 called for in the Five Year Plan.
Existing programs are gaining in strength, many showing more
clearly what it means for the Cause of God to extend further
into the social landscape across a cluster and within a neighborhood or village. The paths that lead to sustained large-scale
expansion and consolidation are being followed with firmer
footsteps, valiant youth often setting the pace. Ways in which
the society-building power of the Faith can find release in various settings are becoming more apparent, and those defining
features that must come to mark the further unfoldment of the
growth process in a cluster are becoming gradually discernible.
The call to carry out and support this work is directed
to every follower of Bahá’u’lláh, and it will evoke a response
in every heart that aches at the wretched condition of the
world, the lamentable circumstances from which so many
people are unable to gain relief. For, ultimately, it is systematic,
determined, and selfless action undertaken within the wide
embrace of the Plan’s framework that is the most constructive
response of every concerned believer to the multiplying ills of a
disordered society. Over the last year, it has become clearer still
that, in different nations in different ways, the social consensus
around ideals that have traditionally united and bound together
a people is increasingly worn and spent. It can no longer offer
205

34.1

34.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

34.3

a reliable defense against a variety of self-serving, intolerant,
and toxic ideologies that feed upon discontent and resentment.
With a conflicted world appearing every day less sure of itself,
the proponents of these destructive doctrines grow bold and
brazen. We recall the unequivocal verdict from the Supreme
Pen: “They hasten forward to Hell Fire, and mistake it for
light.” Well-meaning leaders of nations and people of goodwill
are left struggling to repair the fractures evident in society
and powerless to prevent their spread. The effects of all this
are not only to be seen in outright conflict or a collapse in
order. In the distrust that pits neighbor against neighbor and
severs family ties, in the antagonism of so much of what passes
for social discourse, in the casualness with which appeals to
ignoble human motivations are used to win power and pile up
riches—in all these lie unmistakable signs that the moral force
which sustains society has become gravely depleted.
Yet there is reassurance in the knowledge that, amidst the
disintegration, a new kind of collective life is taking shape
which gives practical expression to all that is heavenly in human
beings. We have observed how, especially in those places where
intensity in teaching and community-building activities has
been maintained, the friends have been able to guard themselves
against the forces of materialism that risk sapping their precious
energies. Not only that, but in managing the various other calls
upon their time, they never lose sight of the sacred and pressing
tasks before them. Such attentiveness to the needs of the Faith
and to humanity’s best interests is required in every community.
Where a program of growth has been established in a previously
unopened cluster, we see how the initial stirrings of activity arise
out of the love for Bahá’u’lláh held in the heart of a committed
believer. Notwithstanding the orders of complexity that must
eventually be accommodated as a community grows in size,
all activity begins with this simple strand of love. It is the vital
thread from which is woven a pattern of patient and concentrated effort, cycle after cycle, to introduce children, youth, and
adults to spiritual ideas; to foster a feeling for worship through
gatherings for prayer and devotion; to stimulate conversations
that illuminate understanding; to start ever-growing numbers
on a lifetime of study of the Creative Word and its translation
into deeds; to develop, along with others, capacity for service;
and to accompany one another in the exercise of what has been
learned. Beloved friends, loved ones of the Abhá Beauty: We
pray for you in earnest on every occasion we present ourselves
206

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

at His Holy Threshold, that your love for Him may give you the
strength to consecrate your lives to His Cause.
The rich insights arising from clusters, and from centers of
intense activity within them, where the dynamics of community
life have embraced large numbers of people deserve special
mention. We are gratified to see how a culture of mutual
support, founded on fellowship and humble service, has quite
naturally established itself in such quarters, enabling more
and more souls to be systematically brought within the pale of
the community’s activities. Indeed, in an increasing number of
settings the movement of a population towards Bahá’u’lláh’s
vision for a new society appears no longer merely as an enthralling prospect but as an emerging reality.
We wish to address some additional words to those of you
in whose surroundings marked progress is yet to occur and
who long for change. Have hope. It will not always be so. Is
not the history of our Faith filled with accounts of inauspicious
beginnings but marvelous results? How many times have the
deeds of a few believers—young or old—or of a single family,
or even of a lone soul, when confirmed by the power of divine
assistance, succeeded in cultivating vibrant communities in
seemingly inhospitable climes? Do not imagine that your own
case is inherently any different. Change in a cluster, be it swift
or hard won, flows neither from a formulaic approach nor from
random activity; it proceeds to the rhythm of action, reflection,
and consultation, and is propelled by plans that are the fruit
of experience. Beyond this, and whatever its immediate effects,
service to the Beloved is, in itself, a source of abiding joy to the
spirit. Take heart, too, from the example of your spiritual kin
in the Cradle of the Faith, how their constructive outlook, their
resilience as a community, and their steadfastness in promoting
the Divine Word are bringing about change in their society at
the level of thought and deed. God is with you, with each of
you. In the twelve months that remain of the Plan, let every
community advance from its present position to a stronger one.
The all-important work of expansion and consolidation
lays a solid foundation for the endeavors the Bahá’í world is
being called to undertake in numerous other spheres. At the
Bahá’í World Centre, efforts are intensifying to methodically
catalog and index the content of the thousands of Tablets which
constitute that infinitely precious bequest, the Holy Texts of our
Faith, held in trust for the benefit of all humankind—this, so as
to accelerate the publication of volumes of the Writings, both in
207

34.4

34.5

34.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

34.7

their original languages and in English translation. Endeavors to
establish eight Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs, sacred Fanes raised up to
the glory of God, continue apace. External affairs work at the
national level has gained markedly in effectiveness and become
increasingly systematic, further stimulated by the release of a
document, sent to National Spiritual Assemblies six months
ago, which draws on the considerable experience generated over
the last two decades and provides an expanded framework for
developing these endeavors in the future. Meanwhile, two new
Offices of the Bahá’í International Community, sisters to its
United Nations Office based in New York and Geneva and to its
Office in Brussels, have been opened in Addis Ababa and Jakarta,
broadening the opportunities for the perspectives of the Cause to
be offered at the international level in Africa and Southeast Asia.
Often prompted by the demands of growth, a range of National
Assemblies are building up their administrative capacity, visible
in their thoughtful stewardship of the resources available to them,
their efforts to become intimately familiar with the conditions of
their communities, and their vigilance in ensuring that the operations of their National Offices grow ever stronger; the need to
systematize the impressive body of knowledge now accumulating
in this area has led to the creation at the World Centre of the
Office for the Development of Administrative Systems. Initiatives
for social action of various kinds continue to multiply in many
countries, enabling much to be learned about how the wisdom
enshrined in the Teachings can be applied to improve social and
economic circumstances; so promising is this field that we have
established a seven-member International Advisory Board to the
Office of Social and Economic Development, introducing the
next stage in the evolution of that Office. Three members of the
Board will also serve as the Office’s coordinating team and be
resident in the Holy Land.
At this Rid.ván, then, while we see much to be done, we see
many ready to do it. In thousands of clusters, neighborhoods,
and villages, fresh springs of faith and assurance are pouring
forth, cheering the spirits of those touched by their reviving
waters. In places, the flow is a steady stream, in some, already
a river. Now is not the moment for any soul to linger upon the
bank—let all lend themselves to the onward surge.
The Universal House of Justice

208

35
29 December 2015
To the Conference of the Continental Boards of Counsellors
Dearly loved Friends,
The Plan upon which the Bahá’í world embarked nearly
five years ago is in its closing stages; the final tally of its accomplishments grows still, but will soon be sealed. The collective
effort it inspired has called for wholehearted reliance on those
powers with which a benevolent Lord has endowed His loved
ones. Gathered with you at this moment of reflection, we are
conscious of a determination among the friends to bring the
current Plan to a fitting conclusion, and of an eagerness to
advance further along the path that experience has marked out.
The considerable distance already travelled along that
path is evident from the present Plan’s most striking outcomes.
The ambitious goal of raising to 5,000 the number of clusters
where a program of growth, at whatever level of intensity, is
under way looks set to be achieved in the months that remain
before Rid.ván 2016. In many scores of clusters, there are over
a thousand inhabitants—sometimes several thousand—taking
part in a well-established pattern of activity that embraces
ever-larger numbers, raising communities whose habits of
thought and action are rooted in Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation.
Worldwide, half a million individuals have now been enabled
to complete at least the first book in the sequence of courses,
an extraordinary feat that has laid a sure foundation for the
system of human resource development. A generation of youth
is being galvanized into action by a compelling vision of how
they can contribute to building a new world. Marveling at what
they have seen, leaders of society in certain places are pressing
the Bahá’ís to make their programs for educating the young
widely available. Faced with increasing complexity, Bahá’í
institutions and their agencies are finding ways to organize the

209

35.1

35.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.3

activities of rising numbers of friends by promoting collaboration and mutual support. And the capacity for learning, which
represented such a priceless legacy of previous Plans, is being
extended beyond the realm of expansion and consolidation to
encompass other areas of Bahá’í endeavor, notably social action
and participation in the prevalent discourses of society. We see
a community fortified with the gifts of strength and hard-won
experience that come from two decades of unremitting effort
focused on a common aim: a significant advance in the process
of entry by troops.
That this process must go much further, there can be no
doubt; nevertheless, developments demonstrate that a significant advance has already occurred. It has prepared the friends
of God for a more exacting test of their capabilities, one that
will also make great demands of your institution as you rally
them to meet its requirements. In this coming Plan, which will
conclude at the threshold of the second century of the Formative
Age of the Faith, we will call the believers everywhere to the
immense exertion necessary to bring to fruition the seeds that
have been so lovingly and assiduously sown and watered in the
five Plans that preceded it.

The emergence of a program of growth
35.4

35.5

The unfoldment of the process of growth in a cluster, while
naturally possessing unique features in every instance shaped by
the receptivity of those who are exposed to the divine teachings,
conforms to certain shared characteristics. Many of these were
discussed in our message to your 2010 conference, in which
reference was made to a series of milestones that mark progress
along a path of development. A collective understanding of
what is required for the friends in a cluster to pass the first of
the milestones we described, and then the second, has grown
over this period.
In the Five Year Plan now ending, the task facing the
believers has been to apply all that had been learned from
previous Plans to the work of extending the process of growth
to thousands of new clusters. What this has shown is that
much depends on the ability of the institutions to draw on
help from friends in other clusters, reinforcing the actions of
an existing Bahá’í community by, for example, arranging the
support of visiting teaching teams or tutors. In many places,
the institute process begins with the assistance of believers from
210

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

stronger neighboring communities who find creative ways of
reaching out to the local population, youth in particular, and
supporting them as they start to engage in service. Efforts to
stimulate activity in a cluster, especially one that has not yet
been opened to the Faith, are greatly enhanced if one or more
individuals settle there as homefront pioneers, concentrating
their attention on part of a village or even a single street where
there is heightened receptivity. Well over 4,500 believers have
already arisen to serve in this way during the present Plan, an
astonishing accomplishment.
Whatever the combination of strategies used, the chief
aim is to initiate a process for building capacity within the
cluster through which its inhabitants, prompted by a wish
to contribute to the spiritual and material well-being of their
communities, are enabled to begin offering acts of service. Once
this fundamental requirement is met, a program of growth has
emerged. Essential, of course, is the support of Auxiliary Board
members and their assistants, whose close involvement from the
first stirrings of activity helps the friends to maintain a clear and
united vision of what is needed.

35.6

Strengthening the pattern of action
Before long, there forms a nucleus of friends in a cluster
who are working and consulting together and arranging activities. For the process of growth to advance further, the number
of people sharing this commitment must rise, and their capacity
for undertaking systematic action within the framework of
the Plan must correspondingly increase. And similar to the
development of a living organism, growth can occur quickly
when the right conditions are in place.
Foremost among these conditions is an institute process
gaining in strength, given its centrality to fostering the movement of populations. The friends who have begun studying
institute materials, and are also investing their energies in organizing children’s classes, junior youth groups, gatherings for
collective worship, or other related activities, are being assisted
to proceed further through the sequence of courses, while the
number of those starting their study continues to rise. With
the flow of participants through institute courses and into the
field of action being maintained, the company of those who are
sustaining the growth process expands. Progress relies to a large
extent on the quality of the efforts of those serving as tutors. At
211

35.7

35.8

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.9

35.10

this early stage, most of them might still be drawn from other
clusters, but at the same time, a few local friends are being
raised up who, as their capacity for action increases, begin to
help others study the materials of the institute. Efforts to usher
in the first cadre of tutors from the cluster should steer a path
between two undesirable outcomes. If individuals proceed
through the courses of the institute too hastily, the capacity to
serve is not sufficiently developed; conversely, if study is overly
prolonged, the process is robbed of the dynamism essential to
its advancement. In differing circumstances, creative solutions
have been used to achieve the necessary balance, ensuring that,
within a reasonable period, some among those residing in a
cluster are enabled to serve as tutors.
Of course, it is not the provision of training by itself that
brings about progress. Efforts to build capacity fall short if
arrangements are not swiftly made to accompany individuals
into the arena of service. An adequate level of support extends
far beyond encouraging words. When preparing to take on an
unfamiliar task, working alongside a person with some experience increases consciousness of what is possible. An assurance
of practical help can give a tentative venturer the courage to
initiate an activity for the first time. Souls then advance their
understanding together, humbly sharing the insights each
possesses at a given moment and eagerly seeking to learn from
fellow wayfarers on the path of service. Hesitation recedes and
capacity develops to the point where an individual can carry
out activities independently and, in turn, accompany others on
the same path.
Where the institute is concerned, the flow of participants
through its courses creates a growing need for them to be
systematically supported as they begin serving as teachers of
children, as animators, and as tutors. Opportunities naturally
arise for those among the core of believers who have already
gained a measure of experience in the educational activities to
assist those who are newer to them. An individual’s readiness
to help others move forward in their efforts to serve might
lead to specific responsibilities being assigned to him or her.
In this manner, coordinators of each of the three stages of the
educational process gradually emerge as needs demand. Their
actions are always motivated by a desire to see capacity develop
in others and to foster friendships founded on cooperation and
reciprocity.
212

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

Clearly, the institute process raises capacity for a broad
range of undertakings; from the earliest courses, participants
are encouraged to visit their friends at their homes and study
a prayer together or share with them a theme from the Bahá’í
teachings. Arrangements for supporting the friends in these
endeavors, which may have been largely informal, eventually
prove inadequate, signaling the need for an Area Teaching
Committee to appear. Its principal focus is the mobilization of
individuals, often through the formation of teams, for the continued spread of the pattern of activity in a cluster. Its members
come to see everyone as a potential collaborator in a collective
enterprise, and they appreciate their own part in nurturing a
spirit of common purpose in the community. With a Committee
in place, the efforts already under way to convene gatherings
for worship, to carry out home visits, and to teach the Faith can
now expand considerably. You will need to encourage National
Spiritual Assemblies and Regional Bahá’í Councils, as much
as training institutes, to remain alert to when conditions in a
cluster call for organizational arrangements to assume a definite
shape—neither acting prematurely nor unduly delaying the
appearance of formal structures.
Just like individuals, the agencies emerging in a cluster need
assistance as they take up their duties. The help that Auxiliary
Board members provide in this regard is essential, but it is also
an important responsibility of Regional Bahá’í Councils or,
where no Council exists, of the National Spiritual Assembly
itself, and it is a pressing concern for training institutes as well.
The capacity to serve ably at the cluster level increases when
spaces are created in which the believers involved can study
guidance, reflect on their actions in its light and draw insights
therefrom, and also become connected with the wider body of
knowledge being generated in surrounding clusters and further
afield. Instead of formulating plans in the abstract, consultations conducted in such spaces often aim at capturing the
reality of the cluster at that particular moment and identifying
the immediate next steps to facilitate progress. Those serving at
the regional or national level may do much to advise the friends
and expand their vision of what can be accomplished, but
they would not seek to impose their own expectations on the
planning process; rather, they are helping the believers who are
laboring in a cluster to gradually enhance their ability to devise
and implement a course of action informed by the experience
213

35.11

35.12

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.13

35.14

accumulating at the grass roots of the community and familiarity with actual conditions. In order to develop the capacity of
cluster agencies to learn and to act systematically, regional and
national institutions need to be conscientious and methodical
in their own efforts to assist them. Your auxiliaries’ support for
this work will ensure that each element of the growth process
attains the requisite characteristics and that the integrity and
coherence of all the endeavors are maintained.
The impulse to learn through action is, of course, present
among the friends from the very start. The introduction of
quarterly cycles of activity capitalizes on this emerging capacity
and allows it to be steadily reinforced. Although this capacity
is specifically associated with the reflection and planning phase
of a cycle, especially the reflection gathering that regulates its
pulsating heartbeat, it also comes to be exercised at all other
points of the cycle by those pursuing related lines of action. We
note that, as learning accelerates, the friends grow more capable
of overcoming setbacks, whether small or large—diagnosing
their root causes, exploring the underlying principles, bringing
to bear relevant experience, identifying remedial steps, and
assessing progress, until the process of growth has been fully
reinvigorated.
Central to the pattern of action evolving in a cluster is the
individual and collective transformation effected through the
agency of the Word of God. From the beginning of the sequence
of courses, a participant encounters Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation in
considering such weighty themes as worship, service to humanity, the life of the soul, and the education of children and youth.
As a person cultivates the habit of study and deep reflection
upon the Creative Word, this process of transformation reveals
itself in an ability to express one’s understanding of profound
concepts and to explore spiritual reality in conversations of
significance. These capacities are visible not only in the elevated
discussions that increasingly characterize interactions within
the community, but in the ongoing conversations that reach
well beyond—not least between the Bahá’í youth and their
peers—extending to include parents whose daughters and sons
are benefiting from the community’s programs of education.
Through exchanges of this kind, consciousness of spiritual forces is raised, apparent dichotomies yield to unexpected insights,
a sense of unity and common calling is fortified, confidence that
a better world can be created is strengthened, and a commit214

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

ment to action becomes manifest. Such distinctive conversations
gradually attract ever-larger numbers to take part in a range
of community activities. Themes of faith and certitude surface
naturally, prompted by the receptivity and experiences of those
involved. What is clear, then, is that as the institute process in a
cluster gains momentum, the act of teaching comes to assume
greater prominence in the lives of the friends.
As progress continues, the rising capacity for meaningful
conversation is harnessed in the plans of the institutions. By
the time cycles of activity have formally emerged, this capacity
is being further stimulated through the expansion phase that
does so much to determine the outcome of each cycle. The
precise objectives of each expansion phase vary, of course,
depending on conditions in the cluster and the circumstances
of the Bahá’í community. In some instances, its main aim is to
increase participation in the core activities; in others, readiness
to enroll in the Faith is discovered. Conversations about the
Person of Bahá’u’lláh and the purpose of His mission occur in
a variety of settings, including firesides and visits to homes. The
actions undertaken during this phase allow abilities developed
through studying the relevant institute materials to be exercised
and refined. As experience grows, the friends become more
adept at discerning when they have found a hearing ear, at
deciding when to be more direct in sharing the message, at
removing obstacles to understanding, and at helping seekers to
embrace the Cause. The approach of working in teams allows
the friends to serve together, offer mutual support, and build
confidence—but even when carrying out actions individually,
they are coordinating their efforts to greater effect. Their focus
and investment of time endow this short but decisive phase
of the cycle with the intensity it demands. This spirit of high
resolve serves to multiply the community’s powers, and in each
cycle the friends learn to depend more and more on the potent
confirmations from the divine realm that their actions attract.
Five years ago, most of the clusters where an intensive
program of growth had been established were those where a
reasonable number of Bahá’ís already lived, often geographically spread out. Efforts on the part of those believers to advance
the work by inviting the participation of friends, coworkers,
extended family, and acquaintances did much to raise the level
of activity throughout the cluster. Indeed, widening the circle
of participation in this way has become a familiar aspect of
215

35.15

35.16

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.17

35.18

Bahá’í life and remains essential. At the same time, experience
indicates that, for growth to accelerate through a steady flow of
new participants entering the institute process, more is required.
The pattern of community life has to be developed in places
where receptivity wells up, those small centers of population
where intense activity can be sustained. It is here, when carrying
out the work of community building within such a narrow
compass, that the interlocking dimensions of community life are
most coherently expressed, here that the process of collective
transformation is most keenly felt—here that, in time, the society-building power inherent in the Faith becomes most visible.
Therefore, a significant task facing you and your auxiliaries
at the outset of the coming Plan will be to assist the friends
everywhere to appreciate that, for existing programs of
growth to continue to gain strength, the strategy of initiating
community-building activities in neighborhoods and villages
that show promise must be widely adopted and systematically
followed. Individuals serving in such areas learn how to explain
the purpose of those activities, how to demonstrate through
deeds the purity of their motives, how to nurture environments
where the hesitant can be reassured, how to help the inhabitants
see the rich possibilities created by working together, and how
to encourage them to arise to serve the best interests of their
society. Yet, recognizing the real value of this work should also
increase awareness of its delicate character. An emerging pattern
of action in a small area can easily be smothered by too much
outside attention; accordingly, the number of friends who move
to such locations or visit them frequently need not be great
since, after all, the process being set in motion is essentially
one that depends on the residents themselves. What is required
from those involved, however, is long-term commitment and
a yearning to become so familiar with the reality of a place
that they integrate into local life and, eschewing any trace of
prejudice or paternalism, form those bonds of true friendship
that befit companions on a spiritual journey. The dynamic that
develops in such settings creates a strong sense of collective will
and movement. Over time, the cluster as a whole and its centers
of intense activity will infuse one another with the heightened
understanding that comes from efforts to apply the teachings
in different contexts.
As the friends in a cluster continue to reinforce and expand
the community-building activities taking shape around them, it
216

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

becomes evident that distinctive progress has been made. All the
elements of a system necessary for growth to be sustained are
now in place. Reaching the second milestone along the continuum of development, which we described to you five years ago,
is accompanied by advances qualitative, but also quantitative—
such as a rise in the number of those involved in conversations
that enable receptivity to be discovered and nurtured, in how
many homes are being visited, in core activities and participation, in how many individuals are beginning the sequence
of courses or supporting others as they gain the confidence
to serve. Attendance at gatherings to mark the Nineteen Day
Feast and Bahá’í Holy Days is being fostered by Local Spiritual
Assemblies. Such advances are the more visible signs of a much
finer development: the gradual spread, within a population, of
a pattern of community life based on Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings.
And, naturally, the number of believers grows.
In the last five years, the path that leads to the emergence
of an intensive program of growth has become more readily
discernible. It must be earnestly pursued. In the Plan that will
commence this Rid.ván, we are calling for growth to be accelerated in all clusters where it has begun. Notwithstanding the
natural ebb and flow characteristic of an organic process, there
should appear a clear arc of progress over the course of twenty
cycles. This combined effort should seek to raise the number of
clusters where a program of growth has become intensive to
5,000 by Rid.ván 2021.
We set this objective before the Bahá’í world conscious
that it is truly formidable; that a herculean labor will be
required; that many sacrifices will have to be made. But faced
with the plight of a world that suffers more each day bereft of
Bahá’u’lláh’s elixir, we cannot, in conscience, ask anything less
of His devoted followers. God willing, their exertions will prove
worthy to crown a hundred years of toil and set the stage for
exploits as yet unimagined that must adorn the second century
of the Formative Age.
In the coming months, you will be initiating consultations
with National Spiritual Assemblies to assess with them the
implications that this global goal holds for their respective
communities, a process of consultation which has to be quickly
extended until it reaches the grass roots. Action must then ensue. We anticipate that progress will be more swiftly achieved in
regions where one or more intensive programs of growth have
217

35.19

35.20

35.21

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

been sustained for some time, as these offer a valuable source of
knowledge and experience and represent a reservoir of human
resources as efforts are made to strengthen surrounding areas.
Pursuit of this goal will also result in the emergence of new
programs of growth, often in unopened clusters that neighbor
those where a significant advance has occurred. Such a flow
of assistance finds its origin in the imperatives laid out in the
Tablets of the Divine Plan.

Embracing large numbers and managing complexity
35.22

35.23

Whereas, when a program of growth is nascent in a cluster,
there might be a handful of individuals who are involved in its
promotion and those who are participating might come from
only several households, by the time a program has become
intensive, these figures, as one would expect, have grown:
perhaps tens of individuals active in the work of expansion and
consolidation, while those participating might well surpass a
hundred. But being able to reach out to large numbers—mobilizing a hundred people or more, whose service connects them
with many hundreds or even thousands—requires the capacity
to adapt to a substantial increase in complexity.
As the growth process continues to gain intensity, the
friends’ efforts to engage in meaningful conversations bring
them into many social spaces, allowing a wider array of people
to become familiar with the teachings and consider seriously
the contribution they can make to the betterment of society.
In addition, more and more homes are provided as venues for
community-building activities, making each a point for the
diffusion of the light of divine guidance. The institute process
comes to be supported by a growing number of friends serving
capably as tutors who, cycle after cycle, offer the full sequence
of institute courses between them, at times with marked
intensity. Thus, human resource development proceeds with
minimal interruption and generates a constantly expanding
pool of workers. While it continues to draw on a diverse range
of the cluster’s inhabitants, those taking its courses in the
greatest numbers are often the youth. The transformative effect
of studying the Word of God is experienced by the many whose
lives are touched in some way by the community’s activities.
And as the flow of people beginning a path of service swells,
considerable progress is made in all aspects of the community-building efforts of the friends. Animators of junior youth
218

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

groups and teachers of children’s classes multiply in number,
fueling an expansion of these two vital programs. Children are
enabled to move from one grade of the classes to another, while
groups of junior youth progress from year to year and ground
their learning in service to society. Cluster agencies, bolstered
by the support of Local Spiritual Assemblies, encourage and
foster the natural passage of participants from one stage of the
educational process to the next. An educational system with all
its component elements, capable of expanding to welcome large
numbers, is now firmly rooted within the cluster.
This kind of progress requires the concerted efforts of
the friends wherever in the cluster they reside. Nevertheless,
experience in the present Plan demonstrates that a pattern of
action that is able to embrace large numbers comes chiefly from
working to bring more neighborhoods and villages—places
where the convergence of spiritual forces is effecting rapid
change within a body of people—to the point where they can
sustain intense activity. A core of individuals from within each
is assuming responsibility for the process of building capacity
in its inhabitants. A broader cross section of the population is
being engaged in conversations, and activities are being opened
up to whole groups at once—bands of friends and neighbors,
troops of youth, entire families—enabling them to realize how
society around them can be refashioned. The practice of gathering for collective worship, sometimes for dawn prayers, nurtures within all a much deeper connection with the Revelation
of Bahá’u’lláh. Prevailing habits, customs, and modes of expression all become susceptible to change—outward manifestations
of an even more profound inner transformation, affecting many
souls. The ties that bind them together grow more affectionate.
Qualities of mutual support, reciprocity, and service to one
another begin to stand out as features of an emerging, vibrant
culture among those involved in activities. The friends in such
locations help the cluster agencies extend the growth process
to different parts of the cluster, for they are eager to introduce
others to the vision of transformation they have themselves
already glimpsed.
In the course of their endeavors, the believers encounter
receptivity within distinct populations who represent a particular ethnic, tribal, or other group and who may be concentrated
in a small setting or present throughout the cluster and well
beyond it. There is much to be learned about the dynamics
219

35.24

35.25

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.26

35.27

involved when a population of this kind embraces the Faith
and is galvanized through its edifying influence. We stress the
importance of this work for advancing the Cause of God: every
people has a share in the World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, and all
must be gathered together under the banner of the oneness of
humanity. In its early stages, the systematic effort to reach out
to a population and foster its participation in the process of
capacity building accelerates markedly when members of that
population are themselves in the vanguard of such an effort.
These individuals will have special insight into those forces and
structures in their societies that can, in various ways, reinforce
the endeavors under way.
As growth in the cluster advances further, greater demands
are being placed on the organizational scheme of the training
institute. Additional coordinators are now required, some
of whom might focus their efforts on a particular part of
the cluster. However, this need not result in another layer of
administration. Much can be achieved through collaboration,
as coordinators start to work together in teams, sometimes
drawing on the help of other capable individuals. The ongoing
interactions and exchange of experience within these teams
constantly enriches understanding and increases the efficacy of
their service. The coordinators are also discovering that their
efforts can be much enhanced if the friends serving as teachers
of children, as animators, and as tutors who live in close
proximity to one another are able to meet in small groups, in
the settings where they serve, and assist each other.
Meanwhile, the Area Teaching Committee is rising to a
new level of functioning. It is engaged in a more thorough
reading of circumstances in the whole cluster: on the one hand,
accurately assessing the capacities of the community and the
effects being produced by sustained growth, and on the other,
understanding the implications of various social realities for
community building in the long term. In the plans it makes each
cycle, the Committee relies heavily on those shouldering the
greatest share of the work of expansion and consolidation, but
given that the number of those connected in some way with the
pattern of activity is now large, a variety of questions become
more pressing: how to mobilize the entire company of believers
in support of teaching goals; how to organize systematic home
visits to the friends who would benefit from deepening and
discussions that connect them with the community; how to
220

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

strengthen spiritual bonds with the parents of children and
junior youth; how to build on the interest of those who have
shown goodwill towards the Faith but have yet to take part in
its activities. Promoting the widespread holding of devotional
meetings is another concern, so that hundreds of people,
eventually thousands, are engaged in worship in the company
of their households and their neighbors. Ultimately, of course,
the Committee looks to continually extend the reach of the
community’s endeavors so that more and more souls become
acquainted with the message of Bahá’u’lláh. In managing the
complexities involved in its own work—which includes gathering and analyzing statistical data, as well as a diversity of other
tasks—the Committee draws on the help of individuals beyond
its own members. These complexities also require increasingly
close collaboration with Local Spiritual Assemblies.
For its part, and in response to growing numbers attending
activities, the Local Assembly is enhancing its capacity to
discharge the many responsibilities it carries on behalf of an expanding community. It seeks to create an environment in which
all feel encouraged to contribute to the community’s common
enterprise. It is eager to see the cluster agencies succeed in their
plans, and its intimate familiarity with the conditions in its area
enables it to foster the development of interacting processes
at the local level. With this in mind, it urges the wholehearted
participation of the friends in campaigns and meetings for
reflection, and it provides material resources and other assistance for initiatives and events being organized in the locality.
The Assembly is also attentive to the need for new believers
to be nurtured sensitively, considering when and how various
dimensions of community life are to be introduced to them. By
encouraging their involvement in institute courses, it aims to
ensure that from the very beginning they regard themselves as
protagonists in a noble endeavor to build the world anew. It
sees to it that gatherings for the Nineteen Day Feast, Holy Day
commemorations, and Bahá’í elections become opportunities
to reinforce the high ideals of the community, strengthen its
shared sense of commitment, and fortify its spiritual character.
As numbers in the community grow larger, the Assembly gives
thought to when it could be beneficial to decentralize such
meetings so as to facilitate ever-greater participation on these
important occasions.

221

35.28

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
35.29

35.30

A notable characteristic of advanced clusters is a mode of
learning that permeates the whole community and acts as a spur
to the rise in institutional capacity. Accounts that offer insight
into a method, an approach, or a complete process continually
flow to and from pockets of activity. The cluster-wide reflection
meeting, at which so much of this learning is presented, is often
complemented by meetings for smaller areas, which generate a
stronger feeling of responsibility among those attending. This
sense of collective ownership becomes more apparent from
cycle to cycle—the force released by a united body of people
taking charge of their spiritual development over generations
to come. And as they do so, the support they receive from
regional and national Bahá’í institutions and their agencies is
experienced as an unceasing flow of love.
A natural outcome of the rise both in resources and in consciousness of the implications of the Revelation for the life of
a population is the stirrings of social action. Not infrequently,
initiatives of this kind emerge organically out of the junior
youth spiritual empowerment program or are prompted by
consultations about local conditions that occur at community
gatherings. The forms that such endeavors can assume are
diverse and include, for example, tutorial assistance to children,
projects to better the physical environment, and activities to
improve health and prevent disease. Some initiatives become
sustained and gradually grow. In various places the founding
of a community school at the grass roots has arisen from a
heightened concern for the proper education of children and
awareness of its importance, flowing naturally from the study
of institute materials. On occasion, the efforts of the friends
can be greatly reinforced through the work of an established
Bahá’í-inspired organization functioning in the vicinity.
However humble an instance of social action might be at the
beginning, it is an indication of a people cultivating within
themselves a critical capacity, one that holds infinite potential
and significance for the centuries ahead: learning how to apply
the Revelation to the manifold dimensions of social existence.
All such initiatives also serve to enrich participation, at an individual and collective level, in prevalent discourses of the wider
community. As expected, the friends are being drawn further
into the life of society—a development which is inherent in the
pattern of action in a cluster from the very start, but which is
now much more pronounced.
222

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

For the movement of a population to have come this far
demonstrates that the process which brought it about is strong
enough to achieve and sustain a high degree of participation in
all aspects of the capacity-building endeavor and manage the
complexity entailed. This is another milestone for the friends
to pass, the third in succession since the process of growth in
a cluster was begun. It denotes the appearance of a system
for extending, in center after center, a dynamic pattern of
community life that can engage a people—men and women,
youth and adults—in the work of their own spiritual and
social transformation. This has already come about in around
two hundred clusters, covering a range of socioeconomic
circumstances, and we anticipate that, by the conclusion of the
coming Plan, it will be observable in several hundred more. It is
a future to which the friends laboring in thousands of clusters
elsewhere can aspire.
In some of the clusters where growth has advanced to
this extent, an even more thrilling development has occurred.
There are locations within these clusters where a significant
percentage of the entire population is now involved in community-building activities. For instance, there are small villages
where the institute has been able to engage the participation
of all the children and junior youth in its programs. When the
reach of activity is extensive, the societal impact of the Faith becomes more evident. The Bahá’í community is afforded higher
standing as a distinctive moral voice in the life of a people and
is able to contribute an informed perspective to the discourses
around it on, say, the development of the younger generations.
Figures of authority from the wider society start to draw on the
insight and experience arising from initiatives of social action
inspired by Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings. Conversations influenced by
those teachings, concerned with the common weal, permeate an
ever-broader cross section of the population, to the point where
an effect on the general discourse in a locality can be perceived.
Beyond the Bahá’í community, people are coming to regard
the Local Spiritual Assembly as a radiant source of wisdom to
which they too can turn for illumination.
We recognize that developments like these are yet a distant
prospect for many, even in clusters where the pattern of activity
embraces large numbers. But in some places, this is the work
of the moment. In such clusters, while the friends continue to
be occupied with sustaining the process of growth, other di223

35.31

35.32

35.33

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

mensions of Bahá’í endeavor claim an increasing share of their
attention. They are seeking to understand how a flourishing
local population can transform the society of which it is an
integral part. This will be a new frontier of learning for the
foreseeable future, where insights will be generated that will
ultimately benefit the whole Bahá’í world.

Releasing the potential of the youth
35.34

35.35

35.36

The marvelous exploits of the youth in the field of service
are one of the finest fruits of the present Plan. If any proof were
needed of the extraordinary potential that the youth possess, it
has been incontrovertibly delivered. In the wake of the youth
conferences convened in 2013, the surge of energy which was
imparted to the work being carried out in clusters demonstrates
clearly how the community of the Greatest Name is able to give
shape to the highest aspirations of young people. How pleased
we are to see that, following the participation of more than
80,000 youth in these conferences, an additional cohort of over
100,000 have joined them in taking part in numerous encounters held since then. Measures to encourage the full engagement
of these growing contingents in the activities of the community
must constitute a major component of the new Plan.
The enthusiastic participation of the youth also highlighted
the fact that they represent a most responsive element of every
receptive population to which the friends have sought to reach
out. What has been learned in this regard is how to help young
people become aware of the contribution they can make to the
improvement of their society. As consciousness is raised, they
increasingly identify with the aims of the Bahá’í community
and express eagerness to lend their energies to the work under
way. Conversations along these lines kindle interest in how the
physical and spiritual powers available to them at this time
of life can be channelled towards providing for the needs of
others, particularly for younger generations. Special gatherings
for youth, now occurring more frequently at the level of the
cluster and even the neighborhood or village, have proved to
be ideal occasions for bringing an intensity to this ongoing
conversation, and they are an increasingly common feature of
cycles of activity in many clusters.
Experience suggests that a discussion about contributing
to the betterment of society fails to tap the deepest springs of
motivation if it excludes exploration of spiritual themes. The
224

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

importance of “doing,” of arising to serve and to accompany
fellow souls, must be harmonized with the notion of “being,”
of increasing one’s understanding of the divine teachings and
mirroring forth spiritual qualities in one’s life. And so it is that,
having been introduced to the vision of the Faith for humanity
and the exalted character of its mission, the youth naturally feel
a desire to be of service, a desire to which training institutes
swiftly respond. Indeed, releasing the capacity of the youth is,
for each training institute, a sacred charge. Yet fostering that
capacity as it develops is a responsibility of every institution of
the Cause. The readiness youth demonstrate to take initiative,
whatever lines of action they choose, can obscure the fact that
they need sustained support from institutions and agencies in
the cluster beyond the early steps.
Youth also support each other in this regard, coming
together in groups to engage in further study and discuss their
service, to reinforce one another’s efforts and build resolve,
looking to ever extend the circle of friendship more widely.
The encouragement offered in this way by a network of peers
provides young people with a much-needed alternative to those
siren voices that beckon towards the snares of consumerism
and compulsive distractions, as well as a counter to the calls to
demonize others. It is against this backdrop of enervating mat­
erialism and splintering societies that the junior youth program
reveals its particular value at this time. It offers the youth an
ideal arena in which to assist those younger than themselves to
withstand the corrosive forces that especially target them.
As youth advance along the path of service, their endeavors
are integrated seamlessly into the activities of the cluster, and
as a consequence, the entire community thrives as a cohesive
whole. Reaching out to the families of young people is a natural
way of strengthening community building. Institutions and
agencies are being challenged to increase their own capacity in
order to find ways of systematically realizing the potential of
the youth. With a greater awareness of this age group’s circumstances and dynamics, they are able to plan accordingly—for
instance, providing opportunities for youth to study courses
intensively, perhaps immediately upon the conclusion of a
youth gathering. The infusion of energy from a vibrant band
of youth allows the tempo of the work within the cluster to be
accelerated.

225

35.37

35.38

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
35.39

While it is right to expect great things from those who have
so much to give in the path of service, the friends must guard
against adopting a narrow outlook on what development to
maturity entails. Freedom of movement and availability of time
enable many youth to serve in ways that are directly related to
the needs of the community, but as they advance further into
their twenties, their horizons broaden. Other dimensions of a
coherent life, equally demanding and highly meritorious, begin
to make stronger claims on their attention. For many, an immediate priority will be further education, academic or vocational,
according to the possibilities before them, and new spaces for
interaction with society open up. Moreover, young women
and men become acutely conscious of the exhortations of the
Supreme Pen to “enter into wedlock” that they may “bring
forth one who will make mention of Me amid My servants”
and to “engage in crafts and professions.” Having taken up
an occupation, youth naturally try to contribute to their field,
or even to advance it in light of the insights they gain from
their continued study of the Revelation, and they strive to be
examples of integrity and excellence in their work. Bahá’u’lláh
extols those “that earn a livelihood by their calling and spend
upon themselves and upon their kindred for the love of God,
the Lord of all worlds.” This generation of youth will form
families that secure the foundations of flourishing communities.
Through their growing love for Bahá’u’lláh and their personal
commitment to the standard to which He summons them will
their children imbibe the love of God, “commingled with their
mother’s milk,” and always seek the shelter of His divine law.
Clearly, then, the responsibility of a Bahá’í community towards
young people does not end when they first start serving. The significant decisions they make about the direction of their adult
lives will determine whether service to the Cause of God was
only a brief and memorable chapter of their younger years, or a
fixed center of their earthly existence, a lens through which all
actions come into focus. We rely on you and your auxiliaries to
ensure that the spiritual and material prospects of the youth are
given due weight in the deliberations of families, communities,
agencies, and institutions.

Enhancing institutional capacity
35.40

The demands of the present Plan—establishing thousands
of new programs of growth and fortifying existing ones—­
226

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

required from national and regional institutions, as well as yourselves, a feat of strength and coordination. Meeting them was
made possible through a shared spirit of collaboration among
the Plan’s three protagonists—the individual, the community,
and the institutions. This spirit was the prerequisite for every
important undertaking, including special initiatives to settle
pioneers in selected countries and, of course, the organization
of 114 youth conferences. A prevalent attitude of joyful service,
flexibility, and detachment from personal preferences lent even
routine administrative activities a sacred quality. The fresh
demands of the coming Plan will, undoubtedly, test the capacity
of Bahá’í institutions further still, but no matter what, they will
surely preserve this unified spirit among all who work together.
As indicated earlier, the movement of clusters along a
continuum depends on there being a commitment from the
institutions to guide and support cluster agencies and provide
resources as necessary. This work is a critical responsibility
of Regional Bahá’í Councils and regional training institutes.
The number of Councils in the world rose from 170 to 203
in the last five years, reflecting the growing need and the
rising capacity for work to be undertaken at this level, and in
some countries where Councils are yet to be formed, specific
steps were taken to build experience in anticipation of their
emergence, such as the appointment of regional teams. In some
regions that stretch across a large territory, Councils have
made arrangements for nurturing the development of groups
of adjoining clusters. Meanwhile, in smaller countries that do
not require the establishment of Regional Councils, National
Assemblies are increasingly giving thought to ways of helping
clusters advance, in some instances by forming a working
group charged with this task; you are encouraged to stimulate
learning in this area, with the aim that, in due course, formal
structures can be defined that would assume this responsibility
in much the same way that Councils do in other countries. And,
as is the case with Councils, we envisage that any such structure
which emerges at the national level will benefit from interaction
with the institution of the Counsellors.
To discharge their duties effectively, regional and national institutions will need to remain fully acquainted with
developments at the grass roots and what is being learned
in the clusters whose progress they oversee. Timely access to
information about the movement of clusters and the work of
227

35.41

35.42

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.43

35.44

the institute in their jurisdictions is required for institutions to
support their agencies and take the many decisions that concern, for instance, the deployment of pioneers, the allocation of
funds, the creation and promotion of Bahá’í literature, and the
planning of institutional meetings; it allows them to accurately
read the reality of their communities and act on the basis of
clearly understood needs when marshaling the energies of the
friends towards meeting the exigencies of the hour. At various
intervals a National Assembly, in consultation with you, may
find it advisable to formally adopt and disseminate certain
aspects of the lessons that have been learned, especially in
relation to organizational schemes at the cluster and regional
levels. The need to stay well informed about the community’s
accumulating experience holds particular implications for
National Assemblies in larger countries that have several
Regional Councils, notably so when the Assembly has devolved
to Councils the work of administering the institute. Here,
new arrangements at the national level have sometimes been
necessary to provide the Assembly with cogent analysis of what
is being learned across all regions.
Of course, a National Spiritual Assembly ultimately has
responsibility for fostering all aspects of a Bahá’í community’s
development. Although it pursues various lines of action itself,
in many cases it fulfills this responsibility by ensuring that
Regional Councils or specialized agencies are able to take steps
to advance areas of endeavor entrusted to them. As the capacity
of the friends increases and the size of a community grows,
the work of a National Assembly in its manifold dimensions
becomes commensurately more complex. Therefore, and in
view of the magnitude of the task before the institutions in the
coming Plan, National Assemblies—as well as Councils—will
benefit from periodically considering, in collaboration with you,
whether their administrative operations, and indeed elements of
their own functioning, could be adjusted or enhanced in ways
that would better support the growth process.
Attaining a higher level of functioning is similarly a pressing concern of training institutes. The community’s efforts to
fortify programs of growth in thousands of clusters and sustain
their intensification will place heavy demands on these agencies.
Their focus, of course, is the unfoldment of the three stages
of the educational process they oversee and the strengthening
of the process of learning associated with each, so that both
228

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

the quality of the institute’s activities and the capacity to
extend them to ever-growing numbers are constantly rising.
While it is important that institutes attend to day-to-day
operational matters, the scale of what must be accomplished
requires that they also become occupied with considerations of
strategy. Training institute boards need to maintain an ongoing
consultation with national or regional coordinators, as well
as with Auxiliary Board members, about how an activity in
a cluster gains strength, how it can be adequately resourced,
what approaches prove effective in different settings, and how
experience can be shared. We have in mind a systematic and
concentrated effort by this collaborative group to gather and
apply insights emerging from the grass roots regarding the
promotion of children’s classes, junior youth groups, and study
circles. Addressing other dimensions of the institute’s work—
such as schemes of coordination at the cluster level, enhancing
the capacity of coordinators, and the management of statistics
and finances—will be essential too. In your work with training
institutes, you will no doubt wish to arrange that they draw on
the experience of other institutes in the same part of the world.
Sites for the dissemination of learning about the junior youth
program also offer a rich source of insight for the institutes of
nearby countries or regions.
As institutions and agencies seek to accelerate the processes
of expansion and consolidation in every land, the question of
financial resources will surely claim increased attention. Indeed,
an important aspect of enhancing institutional capacity over
the coming years will be the ongoing development of local and
national Funds. For this to occur, the generality of the friends
must be invited to consider afresh the responsibility of all
believers to support the work of the Faith through their own
means and, further, to manage their financial affairs in the light
of the teachings.
The future civilization envisaged by Bahá’u’lláh is a prosperous one, in which the vast resources of the world will be
directed towards humanity’s elevation and regeneration, not
its debasement and destruction. The act of contributing to the
Fund, then, is imbued with profound meaning: it is a practical
way of hastening the advent of that civilization, and a necessary
one, for as Bahá’u’lláh Himself has explained, “He Who is the
Eternal Truth—exalted be His glory—hath made the fulfillment
of every undertaking on earth dependent on material means.”
229

35.45

35.46

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.47

35.48

Bahá’ís conduct their lives in the midst of a society acutely
disordered in its material affairs. The process of community
building they are advancing in their clusters cultivates a set of
attitudes towards wealth and possessions very different from
those holding sway in the world. The habit of regularly giving
to the Funds of the Faith—including in-kind contributions
particularly in certain places—arises from and reinforces a
sense of personal concern for the welfare of the community and
the progress of the Cause. The duty to contribute, just like the
duty to teach, is a fundamental aspect of Bahá’í identity which
strengthens faith. The sacrificial and generous contributions of
the individual believer, the collective consciousness promoted
by the community of the needs of the Fund, and the careful
stewardship of financial resources exercised by the institutions
of the Faith can be regarded as expressions of the love that
binds these three actors more closely together. And ultimately,
voluntary giving fosters an awareness that managing one’s
financial affairs in accordance with spiritual principles is an
indispensable dimension of a life lived coherently. It is a matter
of conscience, a way in which commitment to the betterment
of the world is translated into practice.
We direct these statements to you in recognition of the
unique responsibility that you, your deputies, and their
assistants shoulder in helping the friends to advance their understanding in numerous areas, not least, of course, with respect
to the dynamics of growth. As we have previously indicated, in
the institution of the Counsellors the Bahá’í community has a
system through which the lessons learned in the remotest parts
of the planet can benefit the worldwide process of learning in
which every follower of Bahá’u’lláh can take part. As a progressively deeper understanding of the Five Year Plan emerges
among the believers over time, insights that arise from applying
the guidance are recognized, articulated, absorbed, and shared.
In this regard, an immense debt of gratitude is owed by the
community of the Greatest Name to the International Teaching
Centre, which has done so much in recent years, and with such
diligence, to lovingly nurture and energetically promulgate a
mode of learning that has now become well established.
The essential elements of the coming Plan, like those that
came before it, are straightforward. Nevertheless, a profound
understanding of its various facets requires an appreciation
of the sophisticated set of operations through which a cluster
230

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

develops. We rely on your institution being so familiar with
the relevant guidance that the friends in general, and institutions and their agencies in particular, can depend on you to
illuminate their deliberations by calling attention to pertinent
considerations. Clearly, however, the need to assist the friends
in at least 5,000 clusters where the pattern of action is being
intensified will be a considerable challenge, one with implications for your own mode of functioning—but more especially
for that of Auxiliary Board members. Clusters that are in the
front ranks of the growth process in their areas will inevitably
claim a large share of their time; also, administrative arrangements at the regional level will more frequently require their
support. They are concerned with much of what occurs in the
community; attentive both to the development of each stage of
the educational process and to the strengthening of the cycles of
activity, they promote coherence among the lines of action being
advanced in a cluster and fan into flame a passion for teaching.
In the exercise of their responsibility to foster learning and to
help the friends enter the arena of service, they draw heavily
on the training institute, aspects of whose work align closely
with theirs. But their other duties are equally demanding. As
such, they will need to consider how, in order to fulfill those
wide-ranging responsibilities, they can draw on the help of their
assistants more extensively and more creatively. Assistants, of
course, may be assigned any task—simple or complex, general
or highly specific—and this versatility constitutes a distinctive
strength. While some assistants might be occupied with the
development of a local community, others might be given tasks
that relate to an entire cluster. By properly orienting them,
guiding them as capacity expands, and gradually increasing
their duties, Auxiliary Board members will be able to better
exploit the possibilities that exist. Much is sure to be learned
as a result, and you are encouraged to derive insights from the
experience of your auxiliaries.

A period of special potency
The systematic pursuit of the Plan in all its dimensions
gives rise to a pattern of collective endeavor distinguished not
only for its commitment to service, but also for its attraction
to worship. The intensification of activity which the next five
years requires will further enrich the devotional life shared by
those who serve side by side in clusters around the world. This
231

35.49

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

35.50

35.51

process of enrichment is already much advanced: witness, for
instance, how gatherings for worship have been integrated into
the core of community life. Devotional meetings are occasions
where any soul may enter, inhale the heavenly fragrances,
experience the sweetness of prayer, meditate upon the Creative
Word, be transported on the wings of the spirit, and commune
with the one Beloved. Feelings of fellowship and common cause
are generated, particularly in the spiritually heightened conversations that naturally occur at such times and through which
the “city of the human heart” may be opened. By convening
a gathering for worship at which adults and children of any
background are welcome, the spirit of the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár
is evoked in any locality. The enhancement of the devotional
character of a community also has an effect on the Nineteen
Day Feast and can be felt at other times when the friends come
together.
Holy Day commemorations hold a special position in this
regard. The Tablets recited, and the prayers, stories, songs, and
sentiments voiced—all of them expressions of love for those
sacred Figures Whose lives and missions are being remembered—stir the heart and fill the soul with awe and wonder.
During the Five Year Plan about to commence, there will occur
two momentous occasions of this kind: the two-hundred-year
anniversaries of the Birth of Bahá’u’lláh and of the Birth of the
Báb in 2017 and 2019 respectively. These glorious Festivals will
be opportunities for Bahá’ís in every land to attract the
largest possible number of believers, their families, friends,
and collaborators, as well as others from the wider society, to
commemorate moments when a Being peerless in creation, a
Manifestation of God, was born to the world. Celebrating these
bicentenaries is sure to increase appreciation for how the observance of Holy Days, now according to a calendar that unites
the friends of God everywhere, strengthens Bahá’í identity.
Over the coming years, the community will, in fact, encounter a series of anniversaries, concluding with the Centenary
of the Ascension of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in November 2021, which
will close the first century of the Formative Age. Next year the
Bahá’í world will mark one hundred years since the first of the
Tablets of the Divine Plan flowed from the pen of the Master.
In these fourteen Tablets, revealed during one of humanity’s
darkest hours, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá laid out a charter for the teaching
work that defined its theatre of action as the entire planet. Held
232

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

in abeyance until 1937, when the first in a succession of Plans
launched at the instigation of the Guardian was assigned to
the Bahá’ís of North America, the Divine Plan has continued
to unfold over the decades since as the collective capacity of
Bahá’u’lláh’s followers has grown, enabling them to take on
ever-greater challenges. How wondrous the vision of the Plan’s
Author! Placing before the friends the prospect of a day when
the light of His Father’s Revelation would illuminate every
corner of the world, He set out not only strategies for achieving this feat but guiding principles and unchanging spiritual
requisites. Every effort made by the friends to systematically
propagate the divine teachings traces its origins to the forces
set in motion in the Divine Plan.
The coming global endeavor to which the friends will be
summoned calls for the application of proven strategies, systematic action, informed analysis, and keen insight. Yet above all, it
is a spiritual enterprise, and its true character should never be
obscured. The urgency to act is impelled by the world’s desperate condition. All that the followers of Bahá’u’lláh have learned
in the last twenty years must culminate in the accomplishments
of the next five. The scale of what is being asked of them brings
to mind one of His Tablets in which He describes, in striking
terms, the challenge entailed in spreading His Cause:

35.52

How many the lands that remained untilled and uncultivated; and how many the lands that were tilled and cultivated,
and yet remained without water; and how many the lands
which, when the harvest time arrived, no harvester came
forth to reap! However, through the wonders of God’s favor
and the revelations of His loving-kindness, We cherish the
hope that souls may appear who are the embodiments of
heavenly virtue and who will occupy themselves with teaching the Cause of God and training all that dwell on earth.

35.53

The systematic efforts of His loved ones throughout the
world aim at the fulfillment of the hope thus expressed by the
Blessed Perfection. May He Himself reinforce them at every
turn.

35.54

The Universal House of Justice

233

36
2 January 2016
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
We address you these words from the gathering where,
for five successive days, the Continental Counsellors have
earnestly considered the implications of the next global Plan.
Their insightful consultations drew on the impressive body of
knowledge about the process of capacity building that is being
generated in thousands of clusters worldwide. The numerous
accounts that were shared in the course of the Conference
attested the creativity, tenacity, and burgeoning abilities of the
community of the Greatest Name and, above all, its reliance on
the confirmations of the Almighty. There is a growing appreciation among people in all parts of the world of the efficacy of
Bahá’u’lláh’s remedy for healing the maladies of society.
Before the first century of the Formative Age concludes,
there lies a span of time that stretches between two anniversaries associated with documents of measureless significance. It
begins with the centenary of the revelation by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá of
the Tablets of the Divine Plan, just as the friends are embarking
on a new stage in the unfoldment of that Plan. It ends at the
lapse of one hundred years since the Ascension of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá,
which was followed by the opening of the Master’s Will and
Testament. With these thoughts in mind, and in preparation
for their deliberations, the Continental Counsellors, led by the
members of the Universal House of Justice and the International
Teaching Centre, visited the House of the Master—the place
where three of the Tablets of the Divine Plan had been revealed
and where, a few weeks after ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s passing, His Will
and Testament had been read aloud to believers from four
continents. In that sacred House, on the eve of the present
Conference, passages were recited from those two Charters
which, Shoghi Effendi explained, set in motion processes
235

36.1

36.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

36.3

36.4

for the propagation of the Faith and the establishment of its
Administrative Order. This was a fitting prologue to five days
of consultation focused on diffusing more widely the light of
Bahá’u’lláh and strengthening the ability of His institutions to
act as channels through which His promised blessings may flow
to humankind.
The provisions of the coming Five Year Plan are contained
in the message that we addressed to the Conference on its
opening day and which was at the same time distributed to all
National Spiritual Assemblies. The colossal effort that will be
asked from the loved ones of the Lord was clearly recognized
by the Counsellors, but they also voiced their confidence in the
capacity of the Bahá’í world to face this challenge. At no earlier
time could such an undertaking have been seriously contemplated, but given what is being achieved in the present Plan,
the realms of possibility are wider than ever before. Our hearts
were moved by the reports that began to arrive, within hours
of our message to the Conference being released, of the friends
eagerly coming together in settings of all kinds to help one
another become familiar with its contents. We hope that study
of the message will spread rapidly throughout the community.
Meanwhile, the institutions will be putting in place whatever
administrative and organizational arrangements are necessary
to ensure the most auspicious start to the Plan at Rid.ván.
In the few months that remain before then, the work of the
current Plan, establishing new programs of growth in particular,
will continue to be pursued. Every step taken in that direction
will increase the readiness of the worldwide community to
begin the next five-year enterprise. Each moment is precious.
We long to see every believer choose the path of consecrated
service and high endeavor to which ‘Abdu’l-Bahá repeatedly
summoned the friends in the Tablets of the Divine Plan. In our
supplications on your behalf, we will beseech the Author of that
Plan to intercede before the throne of His Father that He might
guide you in your service as long as there are souls in need of
the bread of heaven.
The Universal House of Justice

236

37
26 March 2016
To the Bahá’ís of the world
acting under the Mandate of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
Dearly loved Friends,
Today at dawn, on your behalf, the members of the
Universal House of Justice gathered with the members of
the International Teaching Centre in the Master’s room at the
house in Bahjí to commemorate that pivotal moment when
the first of the Tablets of the Divine Plan was revealed by the
pen of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. Prayers from those wondrous Tablets
were offered in thanksgiving for the glorious achievements of
the past. Divine assistance was sought in support of the labors
required in the forthcoming stage of the Plan’s unfoldment. And
heavenly bounties were implored to ensure still greater victories
in meeting the challenges of future stages, one after another,
reaching as far as the fringes of the Golden Age.
The Divine Plan, that sublime series of letters addressed
by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá to the Bahá’ís of North America between
26 March 1916 and 8 March 1917, constitutes one of the
mighty Charters of His Father’s Faith. Set forth in those
fourteen Tablets, Shoghi Effendi explains, is “the mightiest Plan
ever generated through the creative power of the Most Great
Name.” It is “impelled by forces beyond our power to predict or
appraise” and “claims as the theatre for its operation territories
spread over five continents and the islands of the seven seas.”
Within it are held “the seeds of the world’s spiritual revival and
ultimate redemption.”
In the Tablets of the Divine Plan ‘Abdu’l-Bahá not only provided the broad vision necessary to carry out the responsibilities
entrusted by Bahá’u’lláh to His loved ones, but He also outlined
spiritual concepts and practical strategies necessary for success.
In His exhortations to teach and to travel to teach; to arise
personally or deputize others; to move to all parts of the world
237

37.1

37.2

37.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

37.4

37.5

and open countries and territories, each meticulously named; to
learn the relevant languages and translate and disseminate the
Sacred Texts; to train the teachers of the Faith and especially
youth; to teach the masses and, particularly, indigenous peoples;
to be firm in the Covenant and protect the Faith; and to sow
seeds and cultivate them in a process of organic growth, we find
hallmarks of the entire series of Plans—each a specific stage
of the Divine Plan shaped by the Head of the Faith—that will
continue to unfold throughout the Formative Age.
The initial response to the Tablets of the Divine Plan was
limited to the noble exploits of a few who, like the immortal
Martha Root, arose independently. It was Shoghi Effendi who
assisted the Bahá’ís of the world to gradually grasp the significance of this Charter and learn to approach its requirements
in a systematic manner. The Plan was held in abeyance for
nearly twenty years while the Administrative Order took shape,
after which communities were patiently guided to conduct
national plans, including the two Seven Year Plans in North
America that constituted the first stages of the Divine Plan,
until finally, in 1953, all could unite in the first global Plan, the
Ten Year Crusade. Shoghi Effendi looked beyond that crucial
decade to “the launching of worldwide enterprises destined to
be embarked upon, in future epochs” of the Formative Age,
“by the Universal House of Justice, that will symbolize the
unity and coordinate and unify the activities of these National
Assemblies.” The Divine Plan continues at the present time with
the intensive effort to establish a pattern of community life that
can embrace thousands upon thousands in clusters that cover
the face of the planet. Let every Bahá’í appreciate, more deeply
than ever before, that the provisions of the next stage of the
Divine Plan set forth in our recent message to the Counsellors’
Conference comprise the challenging requirements of the present hour—requirements both urgent and sacred, which, when
sacrificially and persistently addressed, may hasten “the advent
of that Golden Age which must witness the proclamation of the
Most Great Peace and the unfoldment of that world civilization
which is the offspring and primary purpose of that Peace.”
How is it possible to adequately convey our feelings of irrepressible love and unbounded admiration as we reflect on the
exploits of the members of your communities, past and present,
in pursuit of your sacred mission? The vision that unfolds before our eyes is of a grassroots stirring, an organic flowering, a
238

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

resistless movement that has grown imperceptibly at times and
at others in great surges to eventually embrace the entire world:
God-intoxicated lovers exceeding their personal capacities,
embryonic institutions learning to exercise their powers for the
well-being of humanity, communities emerging as shelters and
schools in which human potential is nourished. We pay homage
to the humblest ministrations and ceaseless endeavors of the
Faith’s devoted rank and file, as well as to the extraordinary
accomplishments of its heroes, knights, and martyrs. On vast
continents and scattered islands, from arctic regions to desert
climes, atop mountain plateaus and across lowland plains, in
crowded urban quarters and villages along rivers and jungle
paths, you and your spiritual forebears brought the message
of the Blessed Beauty to peoples and nations. You sacrificed
rest and comfort and left your homes to journey to unfamiliar
lands or homefront outposts. You set aside your own interests
for the common good. Whatever your means, you sacrificially
contributed your share of resources. You taught the Faith to
multitudes, to groups in various settings, and to individuals
in your homes. You quickened souls and helped them on their
own paths of service, disseminated widely the Bahá’í writings
and participated in deep study of the teachings, strove for
excellence in all fields, engaged diverse peoples of all strata
in conversations pertaining to the search for solutions to
humanity’s ills, and initiated efforts for economic and social
development. Though misunderstandings and problems sometimes arose, you forgave one another and marched together in
serried lines. You raised the framework of the Administrative
Order and clung steadfastly to the Covenant, protecting the
Faith from every blow directed against it. In your ardor for the
Beloved, you endured prejudice and estrangement, privation
and loneliness, persecution and imprisonment. You welcomed
and nurtured generations of children and youth upon whom
the vitality of the Faith and future of humanity depend, and
as tested veterans, you heeded the Master’s admonition to
serve until your last breath. You have written the story of the
unfoldment of the Divine Plan on the scroll of its first century.
Before you, beloved friends, lies stretched out the blank scroll
of the future on which you and your spiritual descendants will
inscribe fresh and lasting deeds of renunciation and heroism for
the betterment of the world.
The Universal House of Justice
239

38
26 March 2016
To the chosen recipients of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s
Tablets of the Divine Plan, the Bahá’ís of the
United States and the Bahá’ís of Canada
Dearly loved Friends,
We cannot allow this historic moment to pass without
adding—to our message to the believers worldwide—a word
to those whom the Author of the Divine Plan singled out
for a sacred responsibility and whose triumphs and travails
shaped much of the past century in accordance with His high
expectations.
Soon after the ascension of Bahá’u’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
determined that one of the principal objectives of His ministry
would be to establish a community in North America under
the banner of His Father’s Cause. He dispatched teachers,
illumined pilgrims, embarked upon an unparalleled visit in His
declining years, laid the cornerstone of your House of Worship,
carved in fourteen Tablets addressed to you a divine mission,
and “out of the abundance of His heart chose to bestow on His
favored disciples, to the very last day of His life, the tokens of
His unfailing solicitude.” Later, at a time when the believers in
the Cradle of the Faith were hamstrung by persecution, when
the light of the Faith in Europe was eclipsed by the growing
spectre of another war, when the most vibrant center in central
Asia was dismantled, and even the world center of the Faith
itself was disrupted by a conflagration in the Holy Land, the
“one chief remaining citadel,” the “mighty arm” that still raised
aloft “the standard of an unconquerable Faith,” was, Shoghi
Effendi observed, “none other than the blessed community of
the followers of the Most Great Name in the North American
continent.” He placed you—the Plan’s chief executors and its
coexecutors—among the vanguard of Bahá’u’lláh’s resistless
legions.
241

38.1

38.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
38.3

38.4

It is impossible here to recount the range of your illustrious
achievements during the past century. You have already accomplished that which is worthy of the gratitude and admiration of
the entire Bahá’í world, but your mission is far from complete.
After a century of resolute action, you should, more than ever
before, be able to discern the straight path traced by heavenly
inspiration across the many stages of the Divine Plan since
its systematic execution began in 1937, and thus grasp the
full implications of the latest stage about to open. The tasks
confronting you are not identical with those of an earlier age.
With the international spread of the Faith largely concluded,
demands on you are now most pressing on the homefront.
The process of entry by troops that emerged so tenuously in
the Ten Year Crusade, and was fostered in the decades that
followed, is now being extended through a sound process of
community building in center after center in all those countries
and territories that ‘Abdu’l-Bahá marked out so long ago. Your
sister communities, so many of which you helped to establish,
are now mature, and you stand with them ready to take on the
sterner challenges that lie ahead. The movement of your clusters
to the farthest frontiers of learning will usher in the time anticipated by Shoghi Effendi at the start of your collective exertions,
when the communities you build will directly combat and
eventually eradicate the forces of corruption, of moral laxity,
and of ingrained prejudice eating away at the vitals of society.
This is a time for jubilation. Take pride in the sacrifices and
victories of so many devoted souls who arose in response to
‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s call. With the same spirit of renunciation shown
by your predecessors, cast away the idle fancies and distractions
of a world that has lost its way that you may consecrate
yourselves in the next five years to the priceless opportunities
and inescapable obligations of the latest stage of a spiritual
enterprise on which the fate of humanity ultimately depends.
The Universal House of Justice

242

39
Rid.ván 2016
To the Bahá’ís of the World
Dearly loved Friends,
With the advent of the King of Festivals, the period of
preparation for the next global Plan is over: we now summon
the friends of God to a new five-year commitment of courage,
resolve, and resources.
The company of Bahá’u’lláh’s faithful stands poised.
Institutional gatherings convened across the world in recent
months have sent out successive signals of eagerness to begin
this mighty enterprise. The imperatives contained in the message addressed to the Counsellors’ Conference are already being
translated into decisive plans of action. Decades of heroic endeavor have shaped the community and earned it a measure of
proven ability in fostering growth, steeling it for this moment.
The last two decades, in particular, have markedly accelerated
this longed-for rise in proficiency.
During this period, the adoption of an evolving framework
for action has enabled the friends to progressively nurture and
refine essential capacities, giving rise to simple acts of service at
first, leading to more elaborate patterns of action, which in turn
demanded the development of capacities still more complex. In
this way, a systematic process of human resource development
and community building has been started in thousands of
clusters—and, in many of them, become far advanced. The
focus has not been solely on the individual believer, or the
community, or the institutions of the Faith; all three inseparable
participants in the evolution of the new World Order are being
stimulated by the spiritual forces released through the unfoldment of the Divine Plan. The signs of their progress are more
and more apparent: in the confidence that countless believers
have acquired to share accounts of Bahá’u’lláh’s life and discuss
the implications of His Revelation and peerless Covenant; in
243

39.1

39.2

39.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

39.4

the growing contingents of souls who, as a result, have been
attracted to His Cause and are contributing to the achievement
of His unifying vision; in the ability of Bahá’ís and their friends,
at the very grass roots of the community, to describe in eloquent
terms their experience of a process capable of transforming
character and shaping social existence; in the significantly larger numbers of those indigenous to a country who, as members
of Bahá’í institutions and agencies, are now guiding the affairs
of their communities; in the reliable, generous, and sacrificial
giving to the Fund, so vital for sustaining the advancement
of the Faith; in the unprecedented efflorescence of individual
initiative and collective action in support of community-building activities; in the enthusiasm of so many selfless souls in
the prime of youth who are bringing immense vigor to this
work, notably by tending to the spiritual education of younger
generations; in the enhancement of the devotional character
of the community through regular gatherings for worship; in
the rise in capacity at all levels of Bahá’í administration; in the
readiness of institutions, agencies, and individuals to think in
terms of process, to read their immediate reality and assess their
resources in the places where they live, and to make plans on
that basis; in the now familiar dynamic of study, consultation,
action, and reflection that has cultivated an instinctive posture
of learning; in the mounting appreciation for what it means
to give effect to the Teachings through social action; in the
multiplying opportunities being sought and seized to offer a
Bahá’í perspective on discourses prevalent in society; in the
awareness of a global community that, in all its endeavors, it
is hastening the emergence of divine civilization by manifesting
the society-building power inherent in the Cause; indeed, in the
friends’ growing consciousness that their efforts to foster inner
transformation, to widen the circle of unity, to collaborate with
others in the field of service, to help populations take charge of
their own spiritual, social, and economic development—and,
through all such efforts, to bring about the betterment of the
world—express the very purpose of religion itself.
While no single measure can capture the totality of the
Bahá’í community’s progress, much can be inferred from the
number of clusters worldwide where a program of growth
has been established, which, with gratitude for the bounties
bestowed by the Abhá Beauty, we confirm has surpassed 5,000.
So broad a foundation as this was a prerequisite for taking on
244

Messages of the Universal House of Justice

the task that now confronts the Bahá’í world—strengthening
the process of growth in every cluster where it has begun and
extending further an enriching pattern of community life. The
sustained effort required will be arduous. But the outcome
has the potential to be profoundly significant, even epoch
making. Small steps, if they are regular and rapid, add up to a
great distance travelled. By concentrating on the advance that
must be made in a cluster in an initial period—for instance,
in the six cycles occurring before the first of the bicentennial
anniversaries—the friends will do much to bring their goal for
the full five years within reach. In each cycle are vested fleeting
opportunities for a stride forward, precious possibilities that
will not return.
In society at large, alas, the symptoms of an ever-deepening
malaise of the soul multiply and worsen. How striking that, as
the peoples of the world suffer for want of the true remedy and
turn fitfully from one false hope to another, you are collectedly
refining an instrument that connects hearts with the Word of
God eternal. How striking that, amid the cacophony of fixed
opinions and opposing interests that grows everywhere more
fierce, you are focused on drawing people together to build
communities that are havens of unity. Far from disheartening
you, let the world’s prejudices and hostilities be reminders of
how urgently souls all around you need the healing balm that
you alone can present to them.
This is the last in a series of consecutive Five Year Plans. At
its close, a new phase in the evolution of the Divine Plan will
open, set to propel the community of Bahá’u’lláh towards the
third century of the Bahá’í Era. May the friends of God in every
country appreciate the promise of these few years ahead, which
will be rigorous preparation for the even mightier tasks yet to
come. The present Plan’s broad scope enables every individual
to support this work, however humble one’s share. We ask you,
cherished coworkers, adorers of Him Who is the Best-Beloved
of the worlds, to spare no effort in applying all you have
learned and every God-given ability and skill you possess to
advance the Divine Plan into its next essential stage. To your
own ardent supplications for heavenly assistance we add ours,
offered in the Holy Shrines, on behalf of all who labor for this
all-encompassing Cause.
The Universal House of Justice
245

39.5

39.6

PART II
Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf
of the Universal House of Justice

40
11 August 2008
To an individual Bahá’í
Dear Bahá’í Friend,
. . . The Bahá’í world is engaged in a collective enterprise in
which new approaches and a capacity for learning have greatly
contributed to its expansion and consolidation. The friends
should welcome these developments, while understanding that
new approaches invariably bring with them challenges as well
as new opportunities. The guidance of the House of Justice and
the learning derived from experience will gradually resolve the
challenges and any misunderstandings that arise as the process
unfolds. Each believer can find an active role to play in advancing the program of growth in a cluster, while contributing to
unity and to the cultivation of an attitude of learning. As time
passes, and the capacity and understanding of the believers in
a cluster grow, the activities of the Plan will result not only in
quantitative growth but also in an improvement in the quality
of Bahá’í community life.
As to the role of Local Spiritual Assemblies, you may be
aware that many Assemblies are already making a great contribution to the progress of their clusters in the United States.
This matter has been addressed in some detail by both your
National Spiritual Assembly and Regional Bahá’í Council, and
you may wish to contact them for additional information. It is
true that the nature of the planning process in a cluster, even in
those clusters that fall entirely under the jurisdiction of a single
Assembly, has changed somewhat from the procedures followed
in the past. Yet, it should be evident that the objective of the
planning process, which is to mobilize an ever-greater number
of individual believers to actively participate in the systematic
prosecution of the teaching work, has been quite successful.
Members of Assemblies should therefore be patient and
approach these new challenges with an open heart and mind
249

40.1

40.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

and with a willingness to look beyond the transitory mistakes
that may be made. Assemblies still shoulder a wide range of
responsibilities beyond those that pertain to the teaching work,
and as the number of believers in a cluster increases, additional
responsibilities, including those deriving from a greater involvement in the life of society, will emerge. . . .
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

250

41
30 September 2008
To an individual Bahá’í
Dear Bahá’í Friend,
. . . You ask whether the current focus on the core activities
implies that other activities that have been pursued in the past,
such as firesides, deepenings, proclamation activities, and travel
teaching, are to be abandoned, and you question whether
visiting believers and maintaining Assemblies in remote places
are still important. You also express concern over what you
perceive to be a shift in the locus of decision making away from
elected bodies to appointed institutions, which has given you
the impression “that believers at the grass roots are no longer
being asked what they think, but are more or less being told
what they should think.”
As you know, during the time of the Guardian, emphasis
was placed on establishing the Faith throughout the world and
in raising up the administrative institutions that would provide
the foundation for the prosecution of the Divine Plan. As the
House of Justice observed in its Rid.ván 2000 message, this task
has been essentially completed. The Cause has now entered
a stage in its organic development in which it is necessary to
prepare the community for entry by troops and, beyond that,
mass conversion. The current series of global teaching Plans
have focused the energies of the Bahá’ís on stimulating the
processes of growth and community development at the level
of the cluster, and the friends have been encouraged to teach
the Faith where they live. Those clusters with larger Bahá’í
populations have been selected for close attention with the
expectation that they can more rapidly advance, and the lessons
learned can then be applied to other clusters. This does not
mean that believers from clusters with smaller Bahá’í populations are to be neglected or that they need to wait in order to
initiate their own programs of growth. On the contrary, they
251

41.1

41.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

41.3

41.4

should vigorously engage themselves in the development of the
core activities, enthusiastically pursuing every avenue available
to involve an ever-increasing number of non-Bahá’ís in their
activities.
The emphasis on the two essential movements of the Plan—
the development of human resources through participation
in the courses of the training institute and the progression of
clusters through a series of developmental stages that result
in the initiation of programs of intensive growth—does not
require that activities that have been pursued in the past
be suspended. Rather, what it calls for is that those activities be
assessed in the context of the needs, resources, and priorities of
a cluster and that thoughtful decisions be made in the light of
experience, with consideration being given to the most effective
use of the resources available and the value of systematization.
While the House of Justice has emphasized that it is important
for the friends to maintain focus on the essential activities of
the Plan, it clarified in its message of 27 December 2005 to the
Conference of the Continental Boards of Counsellors that “to
maintain focus does not imply that special needs and interests
are neglected, much less that essential activities are dropped
in order to accommodate others. Clearly, there are a host
of elements that comprise Bahá’í community life, shaped over
the decades, which must be further refined and developed.” The
maintenance of Assemblies in remote areas constitutes one such
special need that is not to be neglected. Yet here, too, the
accomplishment of this objective would be greatly facilitated
by employing the instruments of the current Plan, which have
proven so effective in fostering the growth and development of
the community.
Essential aspects of advancing the process of entry by
troops are the strengthening and development of the three
protagonists of the Plans—the individual believer, the institutions, and the local community—and the development of a
culture of learning. Mistakes will be made as the friends adjust
to the new requirements. But the House of Justice is confident
that as experience and the capacity for learning increase, a
greater measure of coherence among activities related to the
expansion and consolidation of the Cause will be achieved, the
complementary nature of the roles of the institutions of the
Faith will be more clearly understood and the collaboration
that is to take place among them will become more effective. It
252

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

is important to keep in mind that we are in the early stages of
a vast evolutionary process of development that will, in time,
lead to a transformation in all aspects of the life of the Bahá’í
community and the functioning of its institutions. . . .
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

253

42
23 December 2008
To an individual Bahá’í
Dear Bahá’í Friend,
Your email letter dated 26 June 2008, in which you inquire
about the extent to which a Bahá’í, particularly one who is a
social scientist or academic, may speak publicly on sociopolitical issues, has been received by the Universal House of Justice.
We have been asked to convey the following reply.
You are, of course, well aware of the principle of noninvolvement in politics enunciated by Shoghi Effendi. Bahá’ís are
to “refrain from associating themselves, whether by word or by
deed, with the political pursuits of their respective nations, with
the policies of their governments and the schemes and programs
of parties and factions.” They “assign no blame, take no side,
further no design, and identify themselves with no system
prejudicial to the best interests” of the Faith and eschew “the
entanglements and bickerings inseparable from the pursuits of
the politician.” They are to “rise above all particularism and
partisanship, above the vain disputes, the petty calculations,
the transient passions that agitate the face, and engage the
attention, of a changing world.” This principle, which demands
strict avoidance of any type of partisan political activity, must
be scrupulously upheld. However, as society and its political
processes evolve and as the Faith grows, the interaction
between the two becomes increasingly complex. The House of
Justice will provide the necessary guidance over time to apply
this principle to existing circumstances.
The term “politics” can have a broad meaning, and therefore it is important to distinguish between partisan political
activity and the discourse and action intended to bring about
constructive social change. While the former is proscribed,
the latter is enjoined; indeed, a central purpose of the Bahá’í
community is social transformation. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s treatise The
255

42.1

42.2

42.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

42.4

42.5

Secret of Divine Civilization amply demonstrates the Faith’s
commitment to promoting social change without entering into
the arena of partisan politics. So too, innumerable passages in
the Bahá’í Writings encourage the believers to contribute to
the betterment of the world. “Be anxiously concerned with the
needs of the age ye live in,” Bahá’u’lláh states, “and center your
deliberations on its exigencies and requirements.” ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
urges the friends to “become distinguished in all the virtues of
the human world—for faithfulness and sincerity, for justice
and fidelity, for firmness and steadfastness, for philanthropic
deeds and service to the human world, for love toward every
human being, for unity and accord with all people, for removing prejudices and promoting international peace.” Further,
in a letter written on his behalf, Shoghi Effendi explains that
“much as the friends must guard against in any way seeming to
identify themselves or the Cause with any political party, they
must also guard against the other extreme of never taking part,
with other progressive groups, in conferences or committees
designed to promote some activity in entire accord with our
teachings.” In another letter written on his behalf in 1948, when
racial inequality was enshrined in the laws of many states in the
United States, he indicates that there is “no objection at all to
the students taking part in something so obviously akin to the
spirit of our teachings as a campus demonstration against race
prejudice.” Bahá’ís must, therefore, be tireless in addressing,
through word and deed, a range of social issues.
When the Bahá’í community was small, its contribution
to social well-being was naturally limited. In 1983 the House
of Justice announced that the growth of the Faith had given
rise to the need for a greater involvement in the life of society.
Bahá’ís began to engage more systematically in the work of
social and economic development through activities of varying
degrees of complexity. Efforts to contribute to social transformation also include participation in the public discourse on
issues of concern to humanity, such as peace, the elimination of
prejudices of all kinds, the spiritual and moral empowerment of
youth, and the promotion of justice. These two types of activity
have steadily increased over the past twenty-five years and will
grow in scope and influence in the future.
The organized endeavors of the Bahá’í community in these
areas are reinforced by the diverse initiatives of individual believers working in various fields—as volunteers, professionals,
256

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

and experts—to contribute to social change. The distinctive
nature of their approach is to avoid conflict and the contest for
power while striving to unite people in the search for underlying
moral and spiritual principles and for practical measures that
can lead to the just resolution of the problems afflicting society.
Bahá’ís perceive humanity as a single body. All are inseparably
bound to one another. A social order structured to meet the
needs of one group at the expense of another results in injustice
and oppression. Instead, the best interest of each component
part is achieved by considering its needs in the context of the
well-being of the whole.
Involvement in social discourse and action will at times
require that Bahá’ís become associated with the development
of public policy. In this regard, the term “policy,” like the term
“politics,” has a broad meaning. While refraining from discussion of policies pertaining to political relations between nations
or partisan political affairs within a country, Bahá’ís will no
doubt contribute to the formulation and implementation of
policies that address certain social concerns. Examples of such
concerns are safeguarding the rights of women, extending
effective education to all children, curbing the spread of infectious disease, protecting the environment, and eliminating the
extremes of wealth and poverty.
It is evident, then, that as a Bahá’í who is a political scientist
you have a great deal of latitude to comment on social issues.
Yet it is also possible to participate in the generation and application of knowledge in your field by dealing with topics that
are more directly political in nature. You are no doubt aware
of the general advice, written on behalf of the Guardian, that
one way to criticize the social and political order of the day
without siding with or opposing an existing regime is to offer
a deeper analysis on the level of political theory rather than
practical politics. Another approach would be to contribute
to scientific inquiry and shed light on differing viewpoints to
seek common understanding and effective solutions without
succumbing to partisan advocacy and obfuscation. Bahá’u’lláh
states that “every matter related to state affairs which ye raise
for discussion falls under the shadow of one of the words sent
down from the heaven of His glorious and exalted utterance.”
You have the opportunity to mine the gems of His Revelation
and to prepare and present them in a manner that is attractive
to those seeking new insights. You will have to learn over time
257

42.6

42.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

42.8

42.9

how to find a balance between the principles and concepts you
hold as true that come from the Teachings of the Faith and from
your discipline.
Challenges will inevitably arise. For example, you may find
that an issue pertaining to social action has been co-opted by
the political debate among competing factions, and wisdom will
be required to determine whether to adjust your approach or
let the matter rest for a time. In some cases it may be necessary
to forgo opportunities that would thrust you into political
debate or criticism of partisan policies of governments. In
other instances there may be special sensitivities, such as topics
related to countries where the Bahá’í community faces hardship
or oppression, when comments could create the impression that
the friends are engaged in political activity against the interests
of a particular government. These same considerations arise
when evaluating invitations from the media to comment or
engage in discussion on the political affairs of the day. Your
National Spiritual Assembly is available to assist you in clarifying particular questions should the need arise.
Be assured of the prayers of the House of Justice at the
Sacred Threshold that your efforts to reflect the principles of
the Faith in your professional activities may attract the blessings and confirmations of the Ancient Beauty.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

258

43
4 January 2009
The National Spiritual Assembly
of the Bahá’ís of Australia
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
Your email letter dated 23 July 2008 has been received by
the Universal House of Justice, which is heartened to see that
you are engaged in such focused consultations on how best to
develop the Yerrinbool Bahá’í Centre of Learning. You have
raised a number of pertinent questions in this respect, especially
related to the Centre’s programs of study. While such specifics
deserve ample attention, the House of Justice feels it would
be timely for you to step back at this important juncture in
the development of your community and survey from a broad
perspective its challenges and possibilities. In this connection,
we have been asked to write to you as follows.
With the institute process so well advanced and the core
activities flourishing in cluster after cluster, a systematic pattern
of action has taken root in your community, and you can have
every confidence that provisions are now in place to ensure
Bahá’u’lláh’s Message reaches increasing numbers of people of
all ages and backgrounds in your country. It will be essential, of
course, for momentum to be maintained—indeed, accelerated.
But there is no doubt that the prospects for the growth of the
Australian Bahá’í community are bright.
Like so many communities worldwide, then, yours will find
itself being drawn further and further into the life of society
in the years ahead as a natural consequence of its continued
expansion and consolidation. The greater the clarity of thought
you maintain about the nature of this challenge, already showing signs of the pressing demands it brings, the more effective
will be the response of your community in meeting it. At this
stage in your development, the House of Justice encourages
you to begin to examine the work of your community in terms
259

43.1

43.2

43.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

43.4

43.5

of three broad areas of action, which, though distinct from
one another, each with its own methods and instruments, must
achieve a high degree of coherence between them, if they are
to reinforce one another and lend substantial impetus to the
movement of the Australian people towards the spiritually and
materially prosperous civilization envisioned in the Writings
of the Faith. What will ensure this coherence is the process of
systematic learning that characterizes them all.
The expansion and consolidation of the Bahá’í community
itself can be regarded as one area of action, the approach,
methods and instruments of which are now well understood.
Social action can be considered another. This term is being
employed increasingly in consultations among Bahá’ís, as a
result of heightened consciousness and enhanced capacity at
the cluster level. It is to be expected that a desire to undertake
social action will accompany the collective change which begins
to occur in a village or neighborhood as acts of communal
worship and home visits are woven together with activities for
the spiritual education of its population to create a rich pattern
of community life. Social action can, of course, range from the
most informal efforts of limited duration to social and economic development programs of a high level of complexity and
sophistication promoted by Bahá’í-inspired nongovernmental
organizations—all concerned with the application of the teachings to some need identified in such fields as health, education,
agriculture and the environment. In this case, too, there is a
vast amount of experience worldwide, fostered and correlated
by the Office of Social and Economic Development, that has
given rise to effective approaches, which can be exploited at the
level of the cluster as soon as the processes of expansion and
consolidation have advanced to the degree necessary.
Efforts to participate in the discourses of society constitute
a third area of action in which the friends are engaged. Such
participation can occur at all levels of society, from the local to
the international, through various types of interactions—from
informal discussions on Internet forums and attendance at
seminars, to the dissemination of statements and contact with
government officials. What is important is for Bahá’ís to be
present in the many social spaces in which thinking and policies
evolve on any one of a number of issues—on governance, the
environment, climate change, the equality of men and women,
human rights, to mention a few—so that they can, as occasions
260

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

permit, offer generously, unconditionally and with utmost
humility the teachings of the Faith and their experience in
applying them as a contribution to the betterment of society.
Of course, care should be exercised that the friends involved in
this area of activity avoid overstating the Bahá’í experience and
drawing attention to fledging efforts of the Bahá’í community
which are best left to come to maturity without interference,
such as the junior youth spiritual empowerment program. The
development of instruments, methods and approaches for this
area of activity is a chief concern of the Institute for Studies in
Global Prosperity, based here at the Bahá’í World Centre.
The House of Justice wishes us to emphasize that the
above scheme should be regarded as merely one way of
conceptualizing the work of the Bahá’í community, one that
avoids fragmentation and facilitates sound planning. It does
not encompass the entirety of Bahá’í endeavor, the defense
work being a case in point. Nor should it assume the status of
a definition, as reflected in statements such as “There are three
areas of Bahá’í activity.” Further, in no way should the friends
feel there is a division of labor, in which one group participates
in the work of expansion and consolidation, and another group
in each of the other two areas. All Bahá’ís should engage in efforts to expand and consolidate the Faith. They also participate,
to some extent, in social action and the discourses of society.
In the case of the latter two, however, where the work takes
on different degrees of formality, the nature of the tasks to be
carried out can become quite complex and sometimes delicate,
requiring specialized training and preparation.
Indeed, it is in this context that the Universal House of
Justice asks you to consider plans for the development of the
Yerrinbool Bahá’í Centre of Learning. As currently conceived,
the programs of the Centre are intended to attract students
who seek a deeper understanding of various facets of the Faith.
However, you are encouraged to detach yourselves from the
Centre’s past achievements, which have been undeniably praiseworthy, and determine dispassionately what role it would play
in the above scheme. At the outset, it should be acknowledged
that systematic study of the Faith will be a natural outgrowth
of the culture of Bahá’í community life, in which the habit of
reading the writings is fostered by the institute process and
complemented by local deepening classes, conferences, winter
and summer schools, and special gatherings devoted to specific
261

43.6

43.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

43.8

43.9

subjects. So, too, will training needed to carry out programs of
social and economic development take place at the grass roots
of the community. Much learning is still required, however, in
developing human resources that can effectively participate
in the discourses of society, and it is here that the Yerrinbool
Bahá’í Centre of Learning can make a singular contribution.
In that case, the nature of the Centre’s programs would
change. Still concerned with specialized aspects of the Faith,
it would not conduct courses in Bahá’í studies in the same
sense as those offered in universities by departments of religious
studies, which, as you know, the House of Justice discourages
since it could easily lead to a class of individuals in the Bahá’í
community who assume a degree of authority on the basis
of some formal qualification. Nor would the courses of the
Centre simply repeat, in the final analysis, what will already
be covered in local deepening classes. They would seek, rather,
to relate the teachings of the Faith to a range of social issues,
drawing on existing bodies of knowledge in such disciplines as
history, economics, philosophy, political science and sociology.
Decisions regarding the development of the Centre’s facilities
and its recognition as a Private Higher Education Provider
would need to be taken, then, in this light.
The House of Justice looks forward to learning of the
outcome of your consultations on this matter and assures you
of its prayers on your behalf.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

262

44
15 March 2009
To an individual Bahá’í
Dear Bahá’í Friend,
. . . As your experience in the teaching field clearly demonstrates, there are indeed many individuals in your country who
are open to the Message of Bahá’u’lláh and who can be attracted to His Faith. To the earnest teacher, there exists a variety of
methods by which such receptive souls can be introduced to the
divine principles and, eventually, guided to declare their belief
in God’s Messenger for this day….
Beyond doubt is the compelling need to ensure that a
seeker’s faith in the Blessed Beauty, by whatever means it
has been awakened, is nursed to maturity. This process of
spiritual development entails far more than is suggested by
the term deepening; it carries with it an invitation to a higher
consciousness of the purpose for which every individual
human being was created. It implies a fundamental reorienting
of a soul towards its Creator, an awakening to the personal
and social implications of the Guardian’s statement that
Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation is calling into being “a new race of
men,” a wholehearted dedication of one’s talents and abilities
to the attainment of that day when, the Blessed Beauty assures
us, “all men shall be regarded as one soul.” The efflorescence
of those talents and abilities and their channeling into specific
acts of service is the goal that distinguishes the training institute
process from activities intended to deepen new believers.
The implications at the level of society are no less profound
than those at the individual level. “All men,” Bahá’u’lláh asserts,
“have been created to carry forward an ever-advancing civilization.” This, rather than the mere accumulation of religious
converts, is the elevated goal towards which all our efforts
in the teaching field are directed. The central purpose of the
263

44.1

44.2

44.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

44.4

training institute process is to raise up human resources who
can contribute to this objective.
In countless instances—including in your own region—participants of the institute process, whether veteran Bahá’ís or
those only recently acquainted with the Faith, have testified to
the efficacy of the institute courses in opening their eyes to both
a new conception of spiritual reality and its implications for
the creation of a new civilization, as well as empowering them
to become an agent of the renewal society must undergo. The
House of Justice is confident that in … there are innumerable
souls who not only have the capacity to embrace this vision,
but who are ready, even eager, to work towards its realization.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

264

45
17 May 2009
To all National Spiritual Assemblies
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
In its Rid.ván message of 2008, the Universal House of
Justice referred to the widening impact of the dynamism
flowing from the interactions between the three participants
in the Five Year Plan. The celebration of the Nineteen Day
Feast has not remained unaffected by this growing dynamism.
Everywhere the devotional portion of the Feast is enriched by
the sense of reverence cultivated through personal prayer and
regular devotional gatherings. The administrative portion is
animated by reports on the progress of the Cause, as well as
insights contributed by eager believers drawn from diverse
populations, both newly enrolled and long-standing, engaged
in Bahá’í activity. The social portion transcends polite formalities, becoming the joyous reunion of ardent lovers, of tested
companions united in a common purpose, whose conversations
are elevated by spiritual themes.
Over the course of the Plan, in response to questions that
have been raised about the Nineteen Day Feast, the House
of Justice has described how certain fundamental principles
are to be applied within the context of a steadily expanding
community that is embracing souls from all walks of life, from
every background. Since its comments in this respect may well
be of interest to all National Spiritual Assemblies, we have been
asked to write to you as follows.

45.1

45.2

Decentralization of the Feast in urban centers
The decentralization of the Nineteen Day Feast in urban
centers, where a significant percentage of humanity currently
resides, is an inevitable consequence of the growth of the Faith,
marking a significant stage in the organic development of a lo265

45.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

45.4

45.5

45.6

cal community. While care should be taken to avoid instituting
this practice precipitously when the number of believers in the
entire city is relatively small, a Local Spiritual Assembly should
not feel obliged to prolong the pattern of hosting a community-wide Feast if it is no longer propitious. Such a change may be
required when limited time or facilities hamper the satisfactory
observance of the three parts of the Feast in a single location,
most notably the portion devoted to consultation on community affairs. Experience to date has demonstrated the salutary
effect of decentralizing the Feast on the quality of participation,
on bonds of fellowship, and on the overall process of growth.
Although some believers may yearn for the enthusiasm generated by large community gatherings, this need can be met on
other occasions arranged by the Assembly.
In this connection, we are requested to draw your attention
to the 27 December 2005 message of the House of Justice
which indicated that, as the process of growth continued
to gather momentum worldwide, urban centers would need
to be divided into progressively smaller areas, perhaps ultimately into neighborhoods, as a means of facilitating planning
and implementation. Not only would such areas become
focal points of activity, the message suggested, but in each the
Nineteen Day Feast would be conducted. Already in some cities
around the world the Feast is held at the intimate level of the
neighborhood.
Dividing a local community into areas for the purpose
of celebrating the Feast is not without certain challenges. In
many cities around the world, for instance, people have been
segregated into areas according to various factors such as race,
ethnicity, and economic conditions. A Local Assembly must be
mindful that barriers entrenched in the wider population are
not inadvertently perpetuated in the local Bahá’í community as
a whole. By the same token, it must recognize that, for believers
newly enrolled in the community, the desire to assume responsibility for the affairs of the Faith is cultivated more readily in
gatherings close to home, in a familiar environment.
In deciding to decentralize the Feast, a Local Assembly will
need to determine how the devotional portion will be organized
and how reports, news, and announcements will be shared. A
common set of materials for the administrative part of the Feast
would generally be disseminated each Bahá’í month to every
area designated to host a gathering, including any particular
266

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

topics or questions that should be raised. The Assembly will
also want to ensure that consultations in each area are fruitful
and productive, that the views of the friends are brought to
its attention, and that it responds to recommendations in a
loving and constructive manner. To this end, it may decide to
designate one or more friends to act on its behalf in chairing the
gathering, recording the results of consultations, and receiving
contributions to the Fund.

Choice of language
As a general principle, the Nineteen Day Feast and other
official Bahá’í gatherings should be conducted in the conventional language spoken by the people of the locality. However,
as social and economic conditions throughout the world
continue to change, it is not unreasonable to assume that more
and more people will be forced to migrate to urban centers,
forming pockets of minorities, each with a distinct language,
as can already be seen, for example, in the concentrations of
Spanish-speaking populations in North America or of certain
tribal populations in Africa. In such instances, when the Feast
is decentralized, the question may well arise as to whether
the program can be conducted in the language spoken by the
minority population most prevalent in a neighborhood. At
this stage, the House of Justice does not wish to lay down any
hard and fast rules, and it is left to the discretion of the Local
Spiritual Assembly concerned to decide, under the guidance of
the National Spiritual Assembly, how to address the matter,
approaching it with both flexibility and an attitude of learning.
Naturally, whether the Feast is held centrally or in several
locations, a Local Assembly will want all the friends to feel that
they are part of one unified community, irrespective of linguistic
differences, and will take steps to ensure that an inviting
atmosphere is created. To this end, selections from the Writings
in the diverse languages spoken by the friends might well
be included in the devotional program of the Feast. Further,
suitable ways should be found to inform believers not fluent
in the language in which the Feast is conducted of the content
of major messages and announcements. During consultations,
they should be afforded an opportunity to express their views,
in their own language if necessary. It should be feasible to offer
any translation needed in a manner that does not interfere with
the smooth running of the meeting.
267

45.7

45.8

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

Attendance of those who are not Bahá’ís
45.9

45.10

45.11

45.12

The Nineteen Day Feast is an institution of the Cause,
which serves, in part, as a means for the Bahá’í community to
address its affairs in a full and frank manner, without fear of
creating misunderstandings among those unfamiliar with its
purpose. It is for this reason that participation is limited to
members of the Bahá’í community.
In general, the believers are discouraged from inviting
those who are not Bahá’ís to the commemoration of the Feast.
However, friends of the Faith do sometimes appear unexpectedly, and they are not to be turned away. Courtesy and the spirit
of fellowship require that they be warmly received. In this light,
unanticipated visitors, who were by and large infrequent in
the past, have been welcome to join the devotional and social
portions of the Feast, but either they were asked to absent
themselves during the administrative portion or that segment
of the program would be eliminated entirely.
Now, with the Plan’s framework for action well established
in so many places, growing numbers enjoy ready access to
Bahá’í community life through the core activities, and there
is greatly increased likelihood that those who are close to the
Faith will learn about the Nineteen Day Feast and appear at
its celebration. The House of Justice has decided that, in such
instances, rather than eliminating the administrative portion
completely or asking the visitors to withdraw, those conducting
the program can modify this part of the Feast to accommodate
the guests. The sharing of local and national news and information about social events, as well as consultation on topics of
general interest, such as the teaching work, service projects, the
Fund, and so on, can take place as usual, while discussion of
sensitive or problematic issues related to these or other topics
can be set aside for another time when the friends can express
themselves freely without being inhibited by the presence of
visitors.
A similar approach to the administrative portion may
be adopted when the Feast is celebrated in the home of a
family with some members who are not Bahá’ís. As part of
planning these occasions, careful thought must be given, on
the one hand, to the requisites of hospitality and love, and, on
the other, to those of confidentiality and unfettered discussion
on important and sensitive subjects. The Local Assembly, in
consultation with the believers who have such relatives, should
268

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

endeavor to find a satisfactory way to resolve each situation
that arises.

Accumulating experience
The continued expansion of the Bahá’í community in the
years to come will surely give rise to a range of challenges
that will affect how the devotional, administrative, and social aspects of the Nineteen Day Feast are conducted in diverse
localities. Responsibility for addressing these challenges will
fall, in the first instance, on Local Spiritual Assemblies. Theirs is
the duty to remain alert to conditions in their communities, to
consult with the friends, to respond thoughtfully to a multiplicity of needs and circumstances, and to remain flexible without
compromising fundamental principles. In this connection, they
would naturally seek advice from the Auxiliary Board members.
National Spiritual Assemblies will, in collaboration with the
Counsellors, follow developments closely, familiarize themselves with approaches taken in different localities, facilitate
learning to determine which approaches prove most effective
over time, and offer guidance and encouragement.
We are to assure you of the supplications of the Universal
House of Justice in the Holy Shrines that the Blessed Beauty
may confirm your ongoing efforts to guide the friends in
discharging their vital responsibilities to promote the Cause of
God throughout the world.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

269

45.13

45.14

46
20 November 2009
The Spiritual Assembly of
the Bahá’ís of Malaysia
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
The Universal House of Justice has observed with great
interest the strides that your community has made towards
achieving the aim of the Five Year Plan. The hearts of your
believers are no doubt uplifted by the prospect of launching
intensive programs of growth in each and every cluster in
mainland Malaysia by the end of the Plan. The progress
achieved thus far bears out the remarkable capacities of your
community and leaves no doubt that such a marvelous feat is
indeed attainable. The acceleration and coherence that your
community is beginning to experience in its expansion and consolidation are hard-won accomplishments, and much needs to
be done to ensure the sustainability of the gains that are made.
In this regard, the role that the Regional Bahá’í Councils play is
crucial, and we have been asked to convey to you the following.
A major reorganization of the Regional Bahá’í Councils in
mainland Malaysia took place last year when their number was
reduced to three, resulting in larger areas of jurisdiction under
each. This change provided a greater scope for these institutions
to discharge their vital responsibility of overseeing the two
essential movements of the Plan. The House of Justice feels that
Regional Bahá’í Councils should now be given greater latitude
in the discharge of their functions. At the cluster level, the
friends are laboring assiduously within the framework of the
Plan, laying a firm foundation for the expansion of the Bahá’í
community and extending their outreach to their friends, neighbors and colleagues. It is essential that the Regional Councils,
together with the Counsellors and their auxiliaries, help
agencies at the cluster level meet the administrative challenges
of large-scale growth. For example, the Councils will need to
271

46.1

46.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

46.3

46.4

46.5

46.6

assist them in the development of plans; enhance their capacity
to collect, maintain and analyze statistical data; provide occasions for consultation and reflection among institutions and
agencies; and ensure that the learning gained in one cluster is
quickly spread to others. They would also communicate their
plans to the friends on a regular basis. Moreover, your National
Assembly will need to provide adequate resources, financial and
otherwise, to each Regional Council in order for it to carry out
its activities and support the work of the agencies serving in
the clusters.
Your decision last year to form three institute boards in
order to harmonize the institute’s operation with that of the
Regional Councils was a timely step. This has no doubt affected
favorably the institute’s endeavors to raise up human resources
through a formal program of training, building capacity for
service within the Bahá’í community and the larger society.
The House of Justice feels that the administration of the training institutes should now be devolved to the Regional Councils.
This would include the appointment of the board and the
regional coordinator, as well as the approval of the budget for
the training institute, which would become part of the regional
budget that each Council prepares and administers. In their
handling of all matters related to the institute, the Councils
would, of course, work closely with the Counsellors.
As the Regional Councils now take on more responsibilities,
your Assembly and its agencies will naturally extend to them
the necessary support and resources. Your communications in
this regard would usually be conveyed formally. At other times,
the officers of the National Assembly and other individuals
serving at the national office may be in contact with the officers
or members of the Regional Councils in a more informal way.
In such interactions, it will be important that those at the
national level remain mindful of the corporate nature of the
Regional Councils and avoid the tendency to issue directives
that should more properly come from the Council itself.
It is noted in the minutes of your meeting of 7–9 August
2009 that you plan to give the Regional Councils a role in the
development of the National Fund. You are encouraged to
move forward in this direction, leading in due course to the
establishment of regional branches of the National Fund.
The House of Justice is confident that your exertions,
augmented by those of the Continental Counsellors, who will
272

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

consult and communicate directly and frequently with the
Regional Councils, will go a long way towards strengthening
these institutions which are to play such a vital role in the
progress of the Cause in Malaysia. To this end the House of
Justice will offer prayers in the Holy Shrines.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

273

47
28 February 2010
The National Spiritual Assembly of
the Bahá’ís of Papua New Guinea
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
The Universal House of Justice has received your letter
dated 12 November 2009 in which you seek guidance regarding
the means for ensuring, as a National Spiritual Assembly, that
coherence is maintained between the process of social and economic development and those of expansion and consolidation
in your country. You indicate that this question has occupied
your attention for some time now as the number of Bahá’íinspired social and economic development initiatives in Papua
New Guinea has increased. We are requested to write to you as
follows and regret the long delay in doing so.
The Universal House of Justice is heartened to note the
progress that has been made towards the goal of establishing
at least 27 intensive programs of growth in your country by
the end of the Five Year Plan, which draws rapidly closer.
Clearly the attainment of this goal, which will provide a sound
foundation for the further expansion and consolidation of the
Faith throughout Papua New Guinea in the years immediately
ahead, is of paramount importance. As you know, at the heart
of the recent series of global Plans lies the question of capacity
building, and it is in this light that the promotion of social
and economic development can best be considered. Indeed,
experience in Papua New Guinea provides useful insights in
this respect.
As you are aware from messages of the Universal House of
Justice, sustainable progress in the expansion and consolidation
of the Faith was achieved in cluster after cluster around the
globe as men and women from within the local population—
newly enrolled and veteran, young and old—were assisted
through the institute process in their efforts to carry forward
275

47.1

47.2

47.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

47.4

47.5

the work of the Cause themselves. Further, as more and more
of the local population joined them, the scope of their efforts
widened, and through the agency of the reflection meeting,
they were able to lay down plans of action commensurate with
their growing collective capacity. In short, they became active
participants in the process of spiritual transformation under
way in their communities.
If projects designed to meet the material needs of a population
are to contribute to its forward movement, and achieve coherence with efforts undertaken to address spiritual requirements,
they must adopt similar approaches and methods. While not
devoid of the delivery of services at the local level, Bahá’í projects
of social and economic development, whether administered by
the institutions of the Faith or by a Bahá’í-inspired organization,
should be principally concerned with raising the capacity of
the local population to make decisions about its own progress
and implement them. In this connection, the House of Justice
has been pleased to read reports of the effects of the programs
offered by the Rays of Light Foundation, which has been closely
guided by the Office of Social and Economic Development at the
Bahá’í World Centre. Evidence of the complementarity between
its programs and the work of expansion and consolidation, as
currently conceived, is readily apparent.
In your country, as in many others, there are of course
development efforts undertaken by government agencies and
nongovernmental organizations, often funded by large international donors, that follow approaches not necessarily consistent
with the ideas expressed above. Bahá’ís in different fields of
endeavor will often participate, in a professional capacity, in the
implementation or administration of such projects, which, in
their own way, benefit the population. In doing so, they should
take care not to draw the Bahá’í community into their plans or
impinge on its limited resources. Even greater caution must be
exercised to avoid these tendencies when one or more Bahá’ís
receive a grant to carry out a valuable service to the local population, as in the case of the Sirus Naraqi Foundation to combat
the spread of HIV/AIDS—this, especially if they associate their
efforts with the Faith in the eyes of the public in some way. . . .
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

276

48
13 February 2011
To an individual Bahá’í
Dear Bahá’í Friend,
. . . The House of Justice is familiar with your views about
the “double crusade” enjoined by Shoghi Effendi in The Advent
of Divine Justice, as enumerated in your most recent letter as
well as your letters of 6 November and 3 December 2009. You
should rest assured that at every stage in the unfoldment of the
Divine Plan, the Center of Authority in the Faith establishes a
framework for action to guide the believers in a united effort
to apply Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings for the progress of the Bahá’í
community and the building of a world civilization. In the current series of Plans, the House of Justice has identified for the
Bahá’í community the essential aim of advancing the process
of entry by troops and has outlined the activities conducive to
that end. The letter dated 28 December 2010 to the Conference
of the Continental Boards of Counsellors sets out the features
of the next Five Year Plan. It is hoped that the perspective
provided in this letter will make it evident that the entire series
of Plans since 1996 have indeed had at their heart the achievement of the double crusade, “first to regenerate the inward life
of their own community, and next to assail the long-standing
evils that have entrenched themselves in the life of their nation.”
The energetic prosecution of the Plan is, therefore, the surest
and most expeditious way to achieve the objectives to which
you aspire.
You are free to share with your National Spiritual Assembly
any specific suggestions you may feel are conducive to resolving
the challenges facing the American Bahá’í community. However,
you should not feel that, because particular recommendations
are not adopted, the problems you perceive are being ignored.
The activities of the current Plans provide new avenues for
addressing the various facets of the double crusade. The culture
277

48.1

48.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

48.3

48.4

of learning that has emerged in recent years allows the Bahá’í
community to address such challenges in a systematic and
ongoing manner in the context of the activities in a cluster. The
process must inevitably unfold in an organic manner. Initiatives
within the Bahá’í community will emerge at the grass roots in
clusters where there is intensive activity; approaches that prove
to be effective can gradually be shared with other areas.
As new guidance is provided to the Bahá’ís of the world it
is important that the friends welcome the challenge of learning
to put it into effect without falling prey to an unfortunate
duality that pits one position against another. In this particular
instance, a perceived dichotomy between resolving racial
prejudice and undertaking the activities of the Plan can be
transcended through a process of study, consultation, action,
and reflection as described by the House of Justice.
Rest assured of the prayers of the House of Justice in the
Holy Shrines that Bahá’u’lláh may continue to shower you with
His confirmations and assist you in His service.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

278

49
10 April 2011
To an individual Bahá’í
Dear Bahá’í Friend,
The Universal House of Justice appreciates your thoughtful
inquiry concerning the relationship between eliminating racial
prejudice and participating in activities of the Five Year Plan,
which was presented in your email letter dated 13 October
2009. The delay in responding was unavoidable in order to
allow the time necessary for consideration of the issues raised
in light of the progress of the Plan. No doubt, you have by
now carefully studied the message of the House of Justice
dated 28 December 2010 to the Conference of the Continental
Boards of Counsellors, which has a direct bearing on many of
your questions.
In your letter, you observe that the many activities carried
out in the past by the American Bahá’í community to address
racial concerns, despite their obvious merit and the results
achieved to date, have been limited in their effect and have not
been systematic in nature. Your review of such efforts suggests
a cyclical pattern, with fits and starts, in which a certain course
of action is presented with fanfare by the institutions, many
believers take part although others remain on the sidelines,
activities reach a peak, and then, after months or perhaps years,
attention wanes, and the community is drawn to other areas
until some incident occurs or a new heartfelt appeal is uttered,
thus beginning the cycle anew. Simply to repeat the approaches
implemented in the past, then, will surely not produce a
satisfactory result. The House of Justice notes that the pattern
you describe was a characteristic common to many facets of
community life, leading it, in 1996, to set the Bahá’í world on
a new course. During the Four Year Plan, it wrote:

49.1

Our hopes, our goals, our possibilities of moving forward
can all be realized through concentrating our endeavors on

49.3

279

49.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

the major aim of the Divine Plan at its current stage—that
is, to effect a significant advance in the process of entry by
troops. This challenge can be met through persistent effort
patiently pursued…. But also of vital importance to bringing
about entry by troops is a realistic approach, systematic
action. There are no shortcuts. Systematization ensures
consistency of lines of action based on well-conceived plans.
In a general sense, it implies an orderliness of approach in
all that pertains to Bahá’í service, whether in teaching or
administration, in individual or collective endeavor. While
allowing for individual initiative and spontaneity, it suggests
the need to be clearheaded, methodical, efficient, constant,
balanced and harmonious. Systematization is a necessary
mode of functioning animated by the urgency to act.
49.4

49.5

After a decade and a half of systematic effort, a coherent
pattern of activity that advances the growth and development
of the Bahá’í community and its greater involvement in the life
of society has emerged. The current stage of progress and the
challenges that lie immediately ahead are summarized in the
Rid.ván 2010 and 28 December 2010 messages. From this
perspective, it is possible to see how the challenge of addressing
racial prejudice is an integral part of three broad areas of
activity in which the Bahá’í world is currently engaged: expansion and consolidation, social action, and participation in the
discourses of society.
The pattern of spiritual and social life taking shape in
clusters that involves study circles, children’s classes, junior
youth groups, devotional meetings, home visits, teaching efforts, and reflection meetings, as well as Holy Day observances,
Nineteen Day Feasts, and other gatherings, provides abundant
opportunities for engagement, experience, consultation, and
learning that will lead to change in personal and collective
understanding and action. Issues of prejudice of race, class,
and color will inevitably arise as the friends reach out to
diverse populations, especially in the closely knit context of
neighborhoods. There, every activity can take a form most
suited to the culture and interests of the population, so that
new believers can be quickened and confirmed in a nurturing
and familiar environment, until they are able to offer their share
to the resolution of the challenges faced by a growing Bahá’í
community. For this is not a process that some carry out on
behalf of others who are passive recipients—the mere extension
280

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

of a congregation and invitation to paternalism—but one in
which an ever-increasing number of souls recognize and take
responsibility for the transformation of humanity set in motion
by Bahá’u’lláh. In an environment of love and trust born of
common belief, practice, and mission, individuals of different
races will have the intimate connection of heart and mind upon
which mutual understanding and change depend. As a result
of their training and deepening, a growing number of believers
will draw insights from the Writings to sensitively and effectively address issues of racial prejudice that arise within their
personal lives and families, among community members, and
in social settings and the workplace. As programs of growth
advance and the scope and intensity of activities grow, the
friends will be drawn into participation in conversations and, in
time, initiatives for social action at the grass roots where issues
pertaining to freedom from prejudice naturally emerge, whether
directly or indirectly. And, at the national level, the National
Assembly will guide, through its Office of External Affairs, the
engagement of the Faith with other agencies and individuals in
the discourse pertaining to race unity.
You indicate that some friends wonder whether the
Guardian’s statement characterizing racial prejudice as “the
most vital and challenging issue confronting the Bahá’í community at the present stage of its evolution” still applies to
the racial situation in the United States, since it was written
so long ago. The House of Justice has determined that it is
not productive to approach the issue in this manner, as it gives
rise to an implicit and false dichotomy that, either what the
Guardian said is no longer important, or it is so important that
it must be addressed before or apart from all other concerns.
Yet, the situation is infinitely more complex. The American
nation is much more diverse than in 1938, and the friends
cannot be concerned only with relations between black and
white, essential as they are. The expressions of racial prejudice
have transmuted into forms that are multifaceted, less blatant
and more intricate, and thus more intractable. So too, the
American Bahá’í community has evolved significantly and is
no longer at the same stage of its development; it faces a wider
range of challenges but also possesses greater capabilities. The
House of Justice stated that the principles Shoghi Effendi
brought to the attention of the American believers more than
seventy years ago are relevant today, and they will continue to
281

49.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

49.7

49.8

be relevant to future ­generations. It is obvious, however, that
the “long and thorny road, beset with pitfalls” upon which the
friends must tread, will take them through an ever-changing
landscape that requires that they adapt their approaches to
varying circumstances.
In the 28 December message, the House of Justice explained
that “A small community, whose members are united by their
shared beliefs, characterized by their high ideals, proficient in
managing their affairs and tending to their needs, and perhaps
engaged in several humanitarian projects—a community such
as this, prospering but at a comfortable distance from the reality experienced by the masses of humanity, can never hope to
serve as a pattern for restructuring the whole of society.” Even
if such a community were to focus the entirety of its resources
on the problem of racial prejudice, even if it were able to heal
itself to some extent of that cancerous affliction, in the face of
such a monumental social challenge the impact would be inconsequential. Therefore, the friends must effectively assess the
forces at work in their society and, beginning in neighborhoods
and clusters, contribute their share to the process of learning
and systematization which, as their numbers, knowledge, and
influence grow, will transform their lives, families, and communities. Only if the efforts to eradicate the bane of prejudice are
coherent with the full range of the community’s affairs, only if
they arise naturally within the systematic pattern of expansion,
community building, and involvement with society, will the
American believers expand their capacity, year after year and
decade after decade, to make their mark on their community
and society and contribute to the high aim set for the Bahá’ís
by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá to eliminate racial prejudice from the face of
the earth.
It is the ardent hope of the Universal House of Justice that
the believers will appreciate the potentialities that exist within
the current pattern of their organic activities for the realization
of Bahá’u’lláh’s highest aims for humanity and that they will
seize their chance and commit their time, their resources, their
energies—indeed their very lives—to these critical efforts for the
betterment of the world.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

282

50
9 August 2012
The National Spiritual Assembly of
the Bahá’ís of the United States
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
The establishment of ten Regional Bahá’í Councils in your
country is an auspicious moment, occurring at a time when the
Bahá’í community of the United States finds itself in a fortified
condition, forward-looking and eager to learn from experience.
The Universal House of Justice is pleased to observe that the
guidance provided in its messages on the Five Year Plan has been,
and continues to be, the object of thoughtful study, forming the
basis upon which systematic action is being undertaken. It is
clear that the friends are acquiring greater familiarity with the
dynamics of growth, especially when they see how a fresh sense
of community life can emerge, within a neighborhood or town,
as the core activities called for by the Plan become deeply rooted.
In each of your regions, encouraging signs appear. A
perceived dichotomy that had arisen between classes offered
for children living close to one another and centralized schools
covering a broader area is yielding to a more mature understanding. Through participation in the courses of the training
institute, an ever-greater number of friends are enhancing their
capacity to offer spiritual education to those they encounter in
the wider society. Classes for the young initiated at the neighborhood level for this purpose are multiplying. In those places
where the junior youth spiritual empowerment program has
become firmly established, its importance as a vital component
of the community-building process is becoming increasingly
apparent; it is more promising still that the first two clusters
to function as sites for the dissemination of learning about this
program have now emerged. The spirit of collaboration among
the institutions of the Faith, at every level of the administration,
is more and more evident. These are the favorable circumstanc283

50.1

50.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

50.3

50.4

es in which more than four score believers, eager to stimulate
the process of growth across the United States, are assuming
their responsibilities as members of the newly reconstituted
Regional Bahá’í Councils. They do so knowing that their
primary task is to support and guide the work of expansion
and consolidation in cluster after cluster. With this in mind,
the House of Justice has requested us to convey a number of
comments that it is hoped will be of assistance to these devoted
friends as they embark on the work before them.
The message of 28 December 2010 from the Universal
House of Justice describing the features of the current Five Year
Plan makes direct reference to the responsibilities exercised by
Regional Councils. The House of Justice highlights, among
other things, the need for Councils to pay close attention to
the operation of the regional institute, including the scheme
of coordination the institute establishes at the level of the
cluster. The Councils must ensure, too, the timely appearance
and dynamic functioning of Area Teaching Committees. The
discharge of these duties, carried out with the assistance of
the Counsellors and their auxiliaries, will serve to foster the
participation of increasing numbers of the friends in a rising
number of programs of growth—and this, in turn, conduces
to the sound development of the individual, the community,
and the institutions. Overall, a Council would wish to be well
informed about the conditions that prevail in each cluster in
the region. Further, as you will be aware from the 12 December
2011 message of the House of Justice to all National Spiritual
Assemblies, there are two complementary perspectives from
which the Councils will be able to view the pattern of action
in a cluster: the “three-month cycles of activity through which
a community grows” and the emergence of “an educational
process with three distinct stages.”
As they analyze what occurs in a cluster through successive
cycles of activity, Regional Councils will benefit from drawing
upon the system that has been developed in the Bahá’í world for
the generation and dissemination of knowledge about growth;
in this connection, the Councils’ direct relationship with the
Counsellors assumes special significance. Thus will experience
gained from the advancement of clusters in your own and
other countries provide a store of insight as well as inspiration.
Naturally, this knowledge will be derived not only from the
successes that accrue, but also from instances where progress in
284

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

a cluster is impeded. At the same time, a Council will be looking
for signs that learning continues to be the mode of operation at
the level of the cluster. As one cycle follows after another, there
should be a steady rise in the friends’ capacity to apply the
guidance they have received, to reflect on their own experience
in light of what is being learned worldwide, to improve their
efforts, and to surmount the obstacles they encounter.
With respect to the educational process whose emergence
in clusters is essential to the community-building work everywhere, the 12 December message describes its dynamics in some
detail. Although neighborhood classes for the spiritual education of children and the junior youth spiritual empowerment
program both took some time to become well established in the
United States, there is every sign that they are set to flourish. As
indicated above, the prospects for the junior youth program are
especially bright. Its impact can be seen in the transformation
that occurs within the junior youth who are its participants;
they come to regard themselves as agents of social change, each
endowed with a twofold sense of purpose that impels them to
take charge of their own spiritual and intellectual growth and
contribute to the welfare of society. It is noteworthy, however,
that the program’s beneficial effects are also apparent in the
rapid moral and spiritual development of many young people,
be they Bahá’ís or not, who are assisted to serve as animators.
Regional Councils, then, should become adept at analyzing
the conditions in each cluster from both perspectives set out
in the 12 December message. But from either perspective, the
critical importance of systematically developing human resources—which lies at the heart of the Plan—must remain in view.
For unless a capacity for human resource development is well
established in a cluster, there can be no expectation of sustained
progress. Conversely, a Bahá’í community that gains solid
experience in this work will not only have enhanced its ability to
attract growing contingents to the Cause of God; it will also find
itself able to rally a perpetually expanding body of individuals
dedicated to the transformation of the society around them.
That this process should advance at varying speeds within
various populations is to be expected; it is a natural feature
of an organic phenomenon. It should certainly not become a
cause of anxiety. The Plan’s methods and instruments endow
the Bahá’í community with the means to labor effectively
in every setting—from the university campus to the urban
285

50.5

50.6

50.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

50.8

50.9

neighborhood, from the rural town to the city suburb. Yet,
as you clearly appreciate, to expect the rate at which growth
occurs in one instance to be matched in every other, or to
curtail the process within one population because others are not
equally served, would be wholly unreasonable and ultimately
counterproductive. In short, those responsible for coordinating
the endeavors of the friends should be ever sensitive to the
natural unfoldment of the processes they oversee—conscious
of when greater intensity is required in one area and when
patience and encouragement are called for in another. Within
each population, the path of learning will thus open up.
Accepting, indeed welcoming, the dynamics that characterize each set of circumstances will help the friends to refrain
from drawing unhelpful comparisons between the progress
experienced in one area or by one group of believers and that
reported elsewhere. The friends will be involved in the work
according to their capacities and the possibilities before them.
Some will, in the settings where they find themselves, reach
out to family, friends, colleagues, and acquaintances, inviting
them to take part in core activities. Others will become integrated into neighborhoods and dedicate themselves to assisting
particularly receptive populations to advance along a path of
spiritual development—giving rise to centers of intense activity.
Of course, where a special measure of receptivity has been
recognized, resources will need to be deployed to enable it to
blossom. However, the institutions of the Faith need to guard
against stifling an instance of rapid growth in a neighborhood
by calling on too many individuals from outside to become
involved in fledgling efforts.
The House of Justice has previously indicated, in letters
written to you on its behalf, the importance of giving due attention to historically significant populations in the United States.
This imperative remains. Today, the remarkable phenomenon
of immigration that has accelerated in recent decades must also
claim a major share of your attention. After all, immigrants—
whether from the Latin regions of your own continent, across
the Pacific from Asia or the Atlantic from Africa—constitute a
sizable proportion of the American population. Their sons and
daughters now apparently number almost one in four of the
children in your country. Among these families whose origins
lie beyond your borders a vibrant sense of community is often
more pronounced. Raising capacity within these populations
286

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

to conduct classes for their children, and particularly to implement the program for the spiritual empowerment of their
junior youth, will enhance the vitality of community-building
endeavors in many clusters.
Intensifying efforts to reach out to a receptive population
carries certain implications for the scheme of coordination
in a cluster. As indicated in the 12 December message, the
International Teaching Centre is following experience around
the world to articulate what form the elements of an effective
organizational scheme assume under diverse circumstances.
In this regard, the Counsellors and their auxiliaries will work
closely with the Regional Councils, institute boards, and cluster
agencies; your Assembly will, undoubtedly, wish to engage
in regular consultation with the Counsellors on this theme
to assess the implications of new insights for expansion and
consolidation in the United States.
This leads naturally to the consideration of some points
that will require the close attention of your Assembly, for
the acceleration of the process of growth has profound
ramifications for the organization of your National Center.
You will recall that a letter to you dated 19 October 2005,
written on behalf of the House of Justice, explored in some
detail the administrative challenges associated with large-scale
expansion. The broad principles elucidated therein continue to
apply to your present situation. The letter highlighted the importance of decentralization in order to allow for the necessary
flexibility to respond to needs at the grass roots. While many
productive steps have been taken, further changes are required
to enable you to provide the financial resources necessary to
sustain a rising number of programs of growth. Moreover, it
seems likely that the same flexibility—and, at times, innovative
thinking—will be needed in the approach to the provision of
funds to support part- and full-time workers in the regions and
clusters. It should be expected that, in the future, increasing
responsibility will devolve to these levels. A periodic review
of the mandates and the functioning of programs and offices
affiliated with your National Center is necessary to ensure a
suitable balance of structures and an appropriate distribution
of resources at all levels. Even your internal arrangements for
maintaining an open channel of communication between your
Assembly and the Regional Councils would benefit from review

287

50.10

50.11

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

50.12

50.13

so that you remain fully informed of advances made in the
implementation of the Plan nationwide.
A new chapter in the evolution of the Administrative Order
in the United States is now opening, endowed with immense
promise. As those dedicated believers called to serve on Regional
Councils now take up their responsibilities, no doubt they will
be conscious that they function as members of corporate bodies
and not, of course, as individual leaders. Indeed, it will be essential for them to remain mindful of the admonitions in the Bahá’í
writings that apply to all those charged with the administration
of the affairs of the Faith—that they are to approach their work
in the spirit of “humble fellowship” and that they must not
allow themselves to be considered the “central ornaments of the
body of the Cause.” So promising a process of growth unfolding
in your country at the level of the cluster should not come to
revolve around their expectations or to rely on their personal
presence. Guarding against the least trace of any such tendency
will greatly redound to their effectiveness. For the reality of the
situation in many instances is that the richest experience exists
at the grass roots, when a nucleus of believers labors intensively
to build capacity within a population to take charge of its own
spiritual and social advancement. All those who aim to assist
the process of learning at this level must remain sensitive to conditions in individual clusters, lest frequent requests for reports
or summons to gatherings—however well intentioned—sap
energy or dissipate focus. Rather will they wish to do everything
within their means to provide support, to lovingly encourage, to
facilitate the efforts under way, and to respond, with flexibility
and dispatch, to needs as they arise.
The House of Justice deeply appreciates your earnest
exertions to attend to the requirements of the Five Year Plan. It
acknowledges receipt of your email letter dated 18 July 2012
enclosing the names of those believers who have the privilege
to serve on the Regional Councils in the United States. You are
assured that the House of Justice will offer its ardent supplications at the Sacred Threshold on their behalf. May Bahá’u’lláh
continue to bless and confirm the endeavors of the American
community in the path of service to His Cause.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

288

51
19 April 2013
To three believers
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
. . . You state that the disparity between the sexual mores
of contemporary Western society and the standards of the
Bahá’í teachings, which, you indicate, are “in accordance with
the moral code of the East,” poses a considerable challenge to
the current generation of young believers. In this connection
you explain that, since, historically, a great deal of shame was
associated with sexuality in European society, and so much
energy was directed towards hiding and suppressing it, to
abstain from sexual relations before marriage is now negatively
viewed as pietism. You add that today marriage is delayed into
the thirties after young people have completed their education
and saved money for a home, that married life is more complex
than in the past since both spouses usually work, and that those
who profess ideals of chastity, as in the priesthood, often fall
prey to illicit behavior. Further, you suggest that many young
Bahá’ís struggle to meet the standard of purity set forth in the
teachings and that other young people may be reticent to join
the Faith out of a reluctance to uphold it. The House of Justice
appreciates the sincerity with which you have expressed your
thoughts and acknowledges the very real sense of concern you
feel, as the gulf between the principles laid down by Bahá’u’lláh
and the generally accepted practices of society continues to
widen.
Young Bahá’ís in Europe face a particular challenge in this
respect. Buttressed by its material and intellectual achievements
and emboldened by a narrative of accomplishment and superiority that pervades its culture, the West puts itself forward in
various ways as a model and measure for others. Yet, reflect
upon ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s trenchant analysis of the limitations
of European civilization in His treatise The Secret of Divine
289

51.1

51.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

51.3

51.4

Civilization. Weigh carefully, next, His many exhortations to
the individual in that same volume to “become a source of
social good” and to “lay hold of all those instrumentalities
that promote the peace and well-being and happiness, the
knowledge, culture and industry, the dignity, value and station,
of the entire human race.” Far from allowing themselves to
be acculturated to the standards of society, then, Bahá’ís are
called upon to be the vanguard and champions of a new civilization. The important issues you raise, therefore, need to be
considered not only in the context of the current condition of
society but also in light of the nature of Bahá’u’lláh’s laws and
teachings and the responsibilities shouldered by every one of
His followers, as well as by the community and the institutions
of the Faith—this, if the potential to achieve His purpose for
humanity is to be realized.
We live in an age when the role of religion in shaping human thought and in guiding individual and collective conduct
is increasingly discounted. In societies that have bowed to the
dictates of materialism, organized religion is seeing the sphere
of its influence contract, becoming confined mostly to the realm
of personal experience. Not infrequently the laws of religion are
regarded as arbitrary rules blindly obeyed by those incapable
of independent thought or as a prudish and outdated code
of conduct hypocritically imposed upon others by advocates
who, themselves, fail to live up to its demands. Morality is
being redefined in such societies, and materialistic assumptions,
values, and practices pertaining to the nature of humankind
and its economic and social life are taking on the status of
unassailable truth.
Indeed, the expenditure of enormous energy and vast
amounts of resources in an attempt to bend truth to conform
to personal desire is now a feature of many contemporary
societies. The result is a culture that distorts human nature
and purpose, trapping human beings in pursuit of idle fancies
and vain imaginings and turning them into pliable objects in
the hands of the powerful. Yet, the happiness and well-being
of humanity depend upon the opposite: cultivating human
character and social order in conformity with reality. Divine
teachings shed light on reality, enabling every soul to investigate
it properly and to acquire, through the exercise of personal
discipline, those attributes that are to distinguish the human
being. “Man should know his own self,” Bahá’u’lláh states,
290

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

“and recognize that which leadeth unto loftiness or lowliness,
glory or abasement, wealth or poverty.”
“The object of every Revelation,” Bahá’u’lláh declares, is
“to effect a transformation in the whole character of mankind,
a transformation that shall manifest itself, both outwardly and
inwardly, that shall affect both its inner life and external conditions.” His appearance signals the emergence of “a race of men
the nature of which is inscrutable to all save God,” a race that
will be purified “from the defilement of idle fancies and corrupt
desires” and that will manifest “the signs of His sovereignty and
might upon earth.” The teachings of Bahá’u’lláh provide “such
means as lead to the elevation, the advancement, the education,
the protection and the regeneration of the peoples of the earth.”
Thus, enshrined in His Revelation is a pattern for future society,
radically different from any established in the past, and the promotion of His laws and exhortations constitutes an inseparable
part of the effort to lay the foundations of such a society.
It is evident that, if the body and mind are to maintain
good health, the laws that govern physical existence cannot be
ignored. So, too, for any nation to function properly, there are
certain social conventions and laws that, everyone accepts, must
be followed. In the same way, there are laws and principles
that govern our spiritual lives, and attention to them is of
vital importance if the individual and society as a whole are to
develop in a sound and harmonious manner. In recognizing the
Manifestation of God for today, a believer also acknowledges
that His laws and exhortations express truths about the nature
of the human being and the purpose of existence; they raise
human consciousness, increase understanding, lift the standard
of personal conduct, and provide the means for society to
progress. His teachings serve, then, to empower humanity;
they are the harbinger of human happiness, whose call, far
from compelling obedience to an arbitrary and dictatorial
regimen of behavior, leads to true freedom. “Were men to
observe that which We have sent down unto them from the
Heaven of Revelation,” Bahá’u’lláh states, “they would, of a
certainty, attain unto perfect liberty. Happy is the man that hath
apprehended the Purpose of God in whatever He hath revealed
from the Heaven of His Will, that pervadeth all created things.”
“Think not that We have revealed unto you a mere code of
laws,” He declares further, “Nay, rather, We have unsealed the
choice Wine with the fingers of might and power.”
291

51.5

51.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
51.7

51.8

Throughout the world, in diverse cultures, Bahá’ís encounter values and practices that stand in sharp contrast to the
teachings of the Faith. Some are embedded in social structures,
for instance, racial prejudice and gender discrimination,
economic exploitation and political corruption. Others pertain
to personal conduct, especially with respect to the use of
alcohol and drugs, to sexual behavior, and to self-indulgence
in general. If Bahá’ís simply surrender to the mores of society,
how will conditions change? How will the people of the world
distinguish today’s moribund order from the civilization to
which Bahá’u’lláh is summoning humanity? “Humanity,” the
Rid.ván 2012 message of the House of Justice explained, “is
weary for want of a pattern of life to which to aspire.” “A
single soul can uphold a standard far above the low threshold
by which the world measures itself,” the message noted. Young
Bahá’ís especially need to take care, lest they imagine they can
live according to the norms of contemporary society while
adhering to Bahá’í ideals at some minimum level to assuage
their conscience or to satisfy the community, for they will soon
find themselves consumed in a struggle to obey even the most
basic of the Faith’s moral teachings and powerless to take up
the challenges of their generation. “Wings that are besmirched
with mire can never soar,” Bahá’u’lláh warns. The inner joy that
every individual seeks, unlike a passing emotion, is not contingent on outside influences; it is a condition, born of certitude
and conscious knowledge, fostered by a pure heart, which is
able to distinguish between that which has permanence and that
which is superficial. “Wert thou to speed through the immensity
of space and traverse the expanse of heaven,” are Bahá’u’lláh’s
words, “yet thou wouldst find no rest save in submission to Our
command and humbleness before Our Face.”
The duty to obey the laws brought by Bahá’u’lláh for a new
age, then, rests primarily on the individual believer. It lies at the
heart of the relationship of the lover and the Beloved; “Observe
My commandments, for the love of My beauty,” is Bahá’u’lláh’s
exhortation. Yet what is expected in this connection is effort
sustained by earnest desire, not instantaneous perfection. The
qualities and habits of thought and action that characterize
Bahá’í life are developed through daily exertion. “Bring thyself
to account each day,” writes Bahá’u’lláh. “Let each morn be
better than its eve,” He advises, “and each morrow richer than
its yesterday.” The friends should not lose heart in their person292

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

al struggles to attain to the Divine standard, nor be seduced by
the argument that, since mistakes will inevitably be made and
perfection is impossible, it is futile to exert an effort. They are
to steer clear of the pitfalls of hypocrisy, on the one hand—that
is, saying one thing yet doing another—and heedlessness, on the
other—that is, disregard for the laws, ignoring or explaining
away the need to follow them. So too is paralysis engendered
by guilt to be avoided; indeed, preoccupation with a particular
moral failing can, at times, make it more challenging for it to
be overcome.
What the friends need to remember in this respect is that, in
their efforts to achieve personal growth and to uphold Bahá’í
ideals, they are not isolated individuals, withstanding alone
the onslaught of the forces of moral decay operating in society.
They are members of a purposeful community, global in scope,
pursuing a bold spiritual mission—working to establish a pattern of activity and administrative structures suited to a humanity entering its age of maturity. Giving shape to the community’s
efforts is a framework for action defined by the global Plans of
the Faith. This framework promotes the transformation of the
individual in conjunction with social transformation, as two inseparable processes. Specifically, the courses of the institute are
intended to set the individual on a path in which qualities and
attitudes, skills and abilities, are gradually acquired through
service—service intended to quell the insistent self, helping to
lift the individual out of its confines and placing him or her in a
dynamic process of community building.
In this context, then, every individual finds himself or
herself immersed in a community that serves increasingly as an
environment conducive to the cultivation of those attributes
that are to distinguish a Bahá’í life—an environment in which
a spirit of unity animates one and all; in which the ties of
fellowship bind them; in which mistakes are treated with
tolerance and fear of failure is diminished; in which criticism
of others is avoided and backbiting and gossip give way to
mutual support and encouragement; in which young and old
work shoulder to shoulder, studying the Creative Word together
and accompanying one another in their efforts to serve; in
which children are reared through an educational process that
strives to sharpen their spiritual faculties and imbue them with
the spirit of the Faith; in which young people are helped to detect the false messages spread by society, recognize its fruitless
293

51.9

51.10

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

51.11

preoccupations, and resist its pressures, directing their energies
instead towards its betterment. The institutions of the Faith, for
their part, strive to ensure that such an environment is fostered.
They do not pry into the personal lives of individuals. Nor are
they vindictive and judgmental, eager to punish those who fall
short of the Bahá’í standard. Except in extreme cases of blatant
and flagrant disregard for the law that could potentially harm
the Cause and may require them to administer sanctions, their
attention is focused on encouragement, assistance, counsel, and
education.
Such an environment creates a very different set of dynamics than the one found particularly in the highly individualistic
societies of today. Marriage, for instance, need not be long
delayed, as it is in some parts of the world where the maturity
and responsibilities of adulthood are deferred in pursuit of the
license that a socially prolonged adolescence grants. For the individual, who both contributes to and draws strength from the
environment that is the Bahá’í community, adhering to Bahá’í
law is endowed with meaning and, though perhaps still difficult
on occasion, does not pose the insurmountable challenge that
you fear it will. . . .
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

294

52
23 April 2013
The National Spiritual Assembly
of the Bahá’ís of Denmark
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
. . . The challenge you face in helping the friends in your
community to understand the Bahá’í teachings and to apply
them in their lives, as the forces of materialism continue to
grow in strength, is appreciated by the Universal House of
Justice. Enclosed for your reference is a letter recently written
on its behalf to three believers in a neighboring country who
shared similar concerns about the struggles experienced by
young Bahá’í men and women in their efforts to uphold the
standards of the Faith, particularly those related to chastity
and marriage. It is hoped that the points set out in the letter
will assist you in your deliberations on the subject. As the letter
makes clear, the issues involved can best be considered in light
of the relationships that the Administrative Order seeks to forge
among the individual, the institutions, and the community.
While responsibility for adhering to the Bahá’í standard rests
primarily on the individual believer, it is incumbent upon the institutions of the Faith to support the individual, largely through
educational endeavors, and to foster a pattern of community
life that is conducive to the spiritual upliftment of its members.
It is understood, of course, that in the assumption of these and
other sacred duties, Bahá’í institutions may find it necessary
at times to take specific action as a means of protecting the
community and the integrity of Bahá’í law.
In discharging their educational responsibilities towards
the body of the believers, the institutions of the Faith need to
bear in mind how little is accomplished when their efforts are
reduced to repeated admonitions or to dogmatic instruction in
proper conduct. Rather should their aim be to raise consciousness and to increase understanding. Theirs is not the duty to pry
295

52.1

52.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

52.3

into personal lives or to impose Bahá’í law on the individual
but to create an environment in which the friends eagerly arise
to fulfill their obligations as followers of Bahá’u’lláh, to uphold
His law, and to align their lives with His teachings. The efforts
of the institutions will bear fruit to the extent that the friends,
especially those of the younger generation, find themselves
immersed in the activities of a vibrant and growing community
and feel confirmed in the mission with which Bahá’u’lláh has
entrusted them.
One of the most effective instruments at your disposal in
this respect is the training institute. It strives to engage the individual in an educational process in which virtuous conduct and
self-discipline are developed in the context of service, fostering
a coherent and joyful pattern of life that weaves together
study, worship, teaching, community building and, in general,
involvement in other processes that seek to transform society.
At the heart of the educational process is contact with the
Word of God, whose power sustains every individual’s attempts
to purify his or her heart and to walk a path of service with
“the feet of detachment.” The Guardian encouraged young
believers to learn through “active, wholehearted and continued
participation” in community activities. Addressed to one
young believer, a letter written on his behalf explained: “Bahá’í
community life provides you with an indispensable laboratory,
where you can translate into living and constructive action the
principles which you imbibe from the Teachings.” “By becoming
a real part of that living organism,” the letter went on, “you
can catch the real spirit which runs throughout the Bahá’í
Teachings.” Such wholehearted participation in the work of
the Faith provides an invaluable context for the exertion made
by young and old alike to align their lives with Bahá’u’lláh’s
teachings. This is not to say that individuals will not err from
time to time, perhaps on occasion in serious ways. Yet, when
the desire to uphold the Bahá’í standard is nurtured through
service to the common weal in an environment of unfailing
love and warm encouragement, the friends will not feel, in the
face of such difficulty, that they have no other recourse but to
withdraw from community activity out of a sense of shame or,
worse, to cover the challenges they are experiencing with the
veneer of propriety, living a life in which public words do not
conform to private deeds.

296

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

Clearly, then, individual moral development needs to be
addressed in concert with efforts to enhance the capacities
of the community and its institutions. The enclosed letter
describes some of the characteristics of the community life that
Bahá’ís, guided by the institutions, are striving to create. The
environment sought is, at the most fundamental level, one of
love and support, in which the believers, all endeavoring to
achieve the Bahá’í standard in their personal conduct, show
patience and respect to each other and, when needed, receive
wise counsel and ready assistance. Gossip and backbiting have
no place in the Bahá’í community; nor do judgmental attitudes
and self-righteousness.
What is essential for every National Assembly to acknowledge in this connection is that, if mutual love and support
within the community, important as it is, becomes the only
focus, a stagnant environment engendered by an insular mentality will develop. The worldwide Bahá’í community is charged
with an historic mission. It must acquire capacity to address
increasingly complex spiritual and material requirements as
it becomes larger and larger in size. The 28 December 2010
message of the House of Justice indicated: “A small community,
whose members are united by their shared beliefs, characterized by their high ideals, proficient in managing their affairs
and tending to their needs, and perhaps engaged in several
humanitarian projects—a community such as this, prospering
but at a comfortable distance from the reality experienced by
the masses of humanity, can never hope to serve as a pattern for
restructuring the whole of society.” The current series of global
Plans sets out provisions for gradually building individual and
collective capacity for the community’s mission. The institutions of a Bahá’í community that has been allowed to become
complacent will find it difficult to protect the younger members
from the forces of gross materialism, with the accompanying
moral decay, that are assailing society. This, then, points to the
nature of the capacity-building process in which every Bahá’í
institution must energetically engage.
Apart from the measures noted above, which serve to reinforce the integrity of the Bahá’í community, there may be times
when specific action is required on the part of the institutions
to protect it and to uphold the law. Intervention in any specific
case needs, of course, to be carried out with the utmost delicacy
and wisdom. Such cases present themselves when the breach of
297

52.4

52.5

52.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

52.7

52.8

Bahá’í law is public and flagrant, potentially bringing the Faith
into disrepute and damaging its good name, or when the individual demonstrates a callous disregard for the teachings and
the institutions of the Faith, with harmful consequences for the
functioning of the Bahá’í community. In these circumstances,
Spiritual Assemblies should follow a middle way: They should
not adopt a passive approach, which would be tantamount to
condoning behavior contrary to the teachings and which would
undermine the imperative to obey Bahá’í law in the eyes of the
members of the community. Neither, however, should they act
rashly or rigidly to enforce the law, imposing administrative
sanctions arbitrarily.
Should the conduct of a believer become so blatant as
to attract the attention of the Assembly, it would want, after
gaining a relatively clear picture of the issues, to offer loving
but firm advice to the friend involved. In most cases it is
necessary, in the first instance, to determine to what extent the
believer understands the Faith and its standards. Dispassionate
counseling, not infrequently over an extended period, to
assist the individual concerned in gaining an appreciation of
the requirements of Bahá’í law is generally required. So, too,
is patience needed, and he or she should be given sufficient
time to bring about a change. The Assembly, often aided by
the Counsellors or the members of the Auxiliary Boards, may
have to help the individual reflect on his or her particular
circumstances, apply relevant principles, and explore available
options. In deciding on what approach to take, the Assembly
should be guided by the understanding that its objective is to
assist the friends to draw closer to the Faith while taking care
to protect the Bahá’í community from the negative influence
of those who have no intention of adhering to its standards.
When a believer demonstrates an allegiance to the Cause and
a willingness to rectify the situation, continued patience and
loving guidance are in order. All throughout, of course, care is
taken to ensure that an individual’s struggles do not become a
source of backbiting or disunity in the community. In this the
members of the community need to remember that they should
each focus their energies on their own spiritual development
and on overcoming their personal shortcomings.
Only in circumstances where a believer, ignoring all
admonishments, persists in misconduct and knowingly and
consistently violates the law, would it be necessary for the
298

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

Assembly to consider applying administrative sanctions—this,
after warning the individual of the consequences of his or her
continued disregard for the teachings. The decision in such
matters is left to the National Spiritual Assembly, which is
to proceed with the utmost care and circumspection. What is
at stake is the participation of the individual in those aspects
of community life internal to the body of the followers of
Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings, not his or her civil rights. In some cases,
partial sanctions may be adequate, allowing the Assembly to
deal with a situation in a flexible manner. For example, if the
hope is to reawaken in the individual a desire to participate in
community life, full sanctions may be counterproductive; an
appropriate partial sanction, such as suspending his or her right
to be elected to an Assembly, may prove sufficient, for, in any
event, it would not be reasonable for a person who flagrantly
violates Bahá’í law to be in a position to govern the affairs
of the community. Restricting the believer from other forms
of service—for instance, acting as a tutor of a study circle or
as a children’s class teacher—may also be considered. Full removal of administrative rights should be reserved for the most
severe and intractable cases, especially when the protection
of the community becomes a concern. The wise use of partial
sanctions thus provides the Assembly with another means of
strengthening the individual and the community. In letters
written on behalf of the Guardian advising Assemblies on such
matters, he explained that, “although it is sometimes necessary
to take away the voting rights of a believer for purposes of
discipline,” this prerogative of the National Assembly “should
be used only in extreme cases.” If heavy sanctions are applied
to certain acts of immorality, he also observed, “it is only fair
to impose equally heavy sanctions on any Bahá’ís who step
beyond the moral limits defined by Bahá’u’lláh,” which would
obviously, given the circumstances of humanity today, “create
an impossible and ridiculous situation.”
One final point deserves mention: There may be times when
an individual who shows complete indifference to the counsels
of the institutions and firm resolution in his or her desire to
maintain the status quo has no apparent interest in engaging in
the life of the Bahá’í community. In such a case, provided that
his or her conduct has no significant bearing on the good name
of the Faith, the Assembly may decide to leave the individual to
go his or her own way, neither insisting on continued contact
299

52.9

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

52.10

nor feeling obliged to impose sanctions. Equally, however, the
Assembly need not be anxious about quickly removing the
name of the individual from its rolls, given that circumstances
change and a person may, over time, decide to mend his or her
ways and return to participate in the life of the community.
In considering matters such as those outlined above, both
in handling particular cases and in addressing the broader
question of cultivating an attitude of love and respect towards
Bahá’í laws and standards, you will no doubt find ongoing consultation with the Counsellors both essential and illuminating.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

300

53
23 July 2013
The National Spiritual Assembly
of the Bahá’ís of India
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
The Universal House of Justice has been pleased to note
over the past several years that, in cluster after cluster in
India, ever-greater numbers of believers and their friends are
participating in community-building endeavors as they strive
to advance the processes of the Five Year Plan. This, of course,
requires that the institutions of the Faith arise with commensurate strength in order to support these activities and ensure
that the necessary resources are made available as and when
they are needed. One area where institutional capacity will
need to be greatly enhanced is the collection and utilization
of statistical data, and in this regard, we have been asked to
convey the following comments.
As the process of expansion and consolidation progresses
within a cluster, the gathering of numerical data is a natural part
of the everyday activities that take place as the friends carry out
their work and make plans for the next steps they will take.
For instance, it is only reasonable to expect that coordinators
who accompany children’s class teachers would be aware of the
number of such classes and the approximate number of children
attending each one. So too would be the case with other coordinators of the training institute and the members, especially the
secretary, of the Area Teaching Committee. In this connection,
instruments such as the Statistical Report Program (SRP) and
the Statistical Report Program for the Training Institute (SRP
Institute) have proven to be of notable help in maintaining a
record of this information. At certain times during the threemonth cycle of activity, institutions and agencies serving at the
cluster level would pool statistical information, by generating
reports from the Statistical Report Program, thus facilitating
301

53.1

53.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

53.3

53.4

analysis of the overall progress made and planning for the
next cycle of activities. In light of the above, it is apparent that
the collection of data is the result of the organic process of
growth in each cluster and constitutes only one means, albeit
a critical one, for assessing the progress of the Cause and the
community-building process under way. Although the data thus
collected is used primarily for the benefit of agencies at the
cluster level, the Statistical Report Program allows for it to be
easily forwarded to the Regional Bahá’í Council and eventually
to the National Spiritual Assembly, which may require it for its
own analyses.
The Regional Bahá’í Councils play a vital role in facilitating
the flow of information by extending the necessary assistance
and resources to agencies serving at the cluster level and by
raising the capacity of those involved in the collection and
utilization of statistical data. Through such endeavors, they will
also ensure that their own need for information can be readily
met in a timely fashion, without having to issue urgent requests
or frequent reminders.
The House of Justice has noted with pleasure the close and
increasing collaboration of your Assembly with the Counsellors
in several areas that need the attention of both institutions.
Paramount among these is helping Regional Councils attain
higher levels of functioning in various aspects of their work.
You are asked to analyze, together with the Counsellors, what
is being learned in the field regarding the flow of information
and the efficacy of the systems and mechanisms in place at the
regional and cluster levels and determine what lines of action
need to be pursued by each of your institutions. As you are
aware, the administrative aides of the Counsellors have been
interacting closely with institutions and agencies at the regional
and cluster levels with regard to the gathering of information,
and they could potentially make an important contribution to
the efforts to raise capacity in this area of endeavor.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

302

54
24 July 2013
The National Spiritual Assembly
of the Bahá’ís of Canada
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
The Universal House of Justice has recently completed
a series of consultations on the intellectual life of the Bahá’í
community and its greater involvement in the life of society.
It has asked that we convey to you the following reply, further
to your inquiry dated 3 March 2010 regarding the Association
for Bahá’í Studies.
Since its establishment in North America in 1975, the
Association for Bahá’í Studies has made a valued contribution
to the development of the Bahá’í community, and gradually,
a network of chapters or related structures devoted to promoting scholarly activity emerged in different parts of the
world. Although the approach varied according to resources
and circumstances in particular countries, the Associations
addressed a range of similar issues. Among these were fostering appreciation for the importance of personal study of
the Revelation, correlating the teachings with contemporary
thought, defending the Cause, encouraging young believers in
their academic pursuits, attracting the interest and involvement
of non-Bahá’í academics to the extent possible, and providing
a forum for Bahá’í academics to collaborate with one another,
thereby helping to raise capacity among those who participate
within a wide range of disciplines and, particularly, in specific
fields associated more directly with the study of the Faith, such
as history, the study of religion, and translation.
In 1996, the Bahá’í world began to focus on a prodigious effort to better understand and systematize its work of expansion
and consolidation, of growth and community building. Much
has been learned that has profoundly influenced the pattern of
activity in which the community is engaged. The Association
303

54.1

54.2

54.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

54.4

54.5

for Bahá’í Studies, meanwhile, continued to address certain
areas that are complementary to the activities unfolding within
the recent series of Plans. “There are a host of elements that
comprise Bahá’í community life, shaped over the decades, which
must be further refined and developed,” the House of Justice
wrote in a message dated 27 December 2005. It is timely, then,
to reflect upon the many years of experience of the Association,
the coherence of its undertakings with the major areas of action
in which Bahá’ís are engaged, and the possibilities for the most
productive avenues of endeavor in the future.
The House of Justice has observed that Bahá’ís will
increasingly become involved in the discourses of society
within clusters where the process of growth rises in intensity
and at the national level, on topics selected by the National
Assembly. At the same time, it noted that there are “a great
many Bahá’ís who are engaged as individuals in social action
and public discourse through their occupations.” Every believer
has the opportunity to examine the forces operating in society
and introduce relevant aspects of the teachings within the discourses prevalent in whatever social space he or she is present.
It is, perhaps, as a means to enhance the abilities of the friends
to explore such opportunities in relation to their scholarly interests that the endeavors of the Association for Bahá’í Studies
can be conceived. Through the specialized settings it creates,
the Association can promote learning among a wide range of
believers across a wide range of disciplines.
Central to the effort to advance the work of expansion
and consolidation, social action, and the involvement in the
discourses of society is the notion of an evolving conceptual
framework, a matrix that organizes thought and gives shape
to activities and which becomes more elaborate as experience
accumulates. It would be fruitful if the elements of this framework most relevant to the work of the Associations for Bahá’í
Studies can be consciously and progressively clarified. In this
respect, it may be useful to give consideration to insights that
have contributed to the community’s progress: the relationship
between study and action, the need for focus, which is not to
be confused with uniformity, the challenge of fostering the
capacity of individuals and accompanying others in service,
the dynamics of organic development, the institutional arrangements necessary to sustain ever more complex patterns
of activity, the coherence required among all areas of endeavor,
304

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

and sound relations among individuals, the community, and the
institutions. Perhaps the most important of these is learning in
action; the friends participate in an ongoing process of action,
reflection, study, and consultation in order to address obstacles
and share successes, reexamine and revise strategies and methods, and systematize and improve efforts over time.
One of the critical aspects of a conceptual framework that
will require careful attention in the years ahead is the generation and application of knowledge, a topic that those gathered
at the conference of the Association for Bahá’í Studies will
explore in August. At the heart of most disciplines of human
knowledge is a degree of consensus about methodology—an
understanding of methods and how to use them appropriately
to systematically investigate reality to achieve reliable results
and sound conclusions. Bahá’ís who are involved in various
disciplines—economics, education, history, social science,
philosophy, and many others—are obviously conversant and
fully engaged with the methods employed in their fields. It is
they who have the responsibility to earnestly strive to reflect
on the implications that the truths found in the Revelation may
hold for their work. The principle of the harmony of science
and religion, faithfully upheld, will ensure that religious belief
does not succumb to superstition and that scientific findings
are not appropriated by materialism. The friends who seek to
excel in scholarly activity will, of course, strive to live up to the
high expectations set forth by Bahá’u’lláh and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.
Whatever the extent of their achievements, they are an integral
part of the community; they are not exempt from obligations
placed upon any believer and, at the same time, deserve the
community’s understanding, forbearance, support, and respect.
As unity of thought around essential concepts emerges, the
Association may find it useful to explore fresh approaches with
some simple steps that can grow in complexity. Gradually, those
aspects of the conceptual framework pertaining to intellectual
inquiry in diverse fields will become clearer and grow richer.
For example, a number of small seminars could be held to assist
individuals from certain professions or academic disciplines
to examine some aspect of the discourse of their field. Specific
topics could be selected, and a group of participants with
experience could share articles, prepare papers, and consult on
contemporary perspectives and related Bahá’í concepts. Special
interest groups, such as philosophy or religious studies, could
305

54.6

54.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

54.8

have gatherings to intensify their efforts. Periodic communications or follow-up meetings could be arranged to increase the
effectiveness of the participation of these groups of individuals
in aspects of the discourse in their chosen fields. Focus could
also be directed toward those areas in the academic literature
pertaining to the Faith that are ignored or dealt with in a misleading or problematic manner. In addition, existing activities,
such as the hosting of a large conference, may be reimagined.
Of course, continued exertions must be directed toward preparing and disseminating articles, periodicals, and books.
One additional point will be central to these reflections. The
training institute is pivotal in the development of the capacity of
veteran and new believers for active involvement in the work of
expansion and consolidation. Beyond this, the institute provides
the structure for an educational process with three distinct stages that will increasingly serve cohorts of individuals from age six
into adulthood. In the experience offered by the institute, participants are not merely presented with information, but through
study of the courses and involvement in the community-building
activities in which their lessons find practical expression, they
acquire knowledge, skills, and spiritual insights that enable them
to effectively foster personal and social change. Yet, whatever
the scope of its curriculum and no matter how fundamental it
is to the progress of the community, involvement in the institute
is only a part of a lifetime of inquiry in which these friends will
be engaged—one that will include exploration of the Revelation
as well as various disciplines of knowledge. The upcoming
youth conferences, which will draw tens of thousands of young
people, are representative of swelling numbers who, shaped by
the institute process at the dawning of their maturity, will set
their footsteps firmly in the path of learning and action that
will extend throughout their academic studies and beyond.
The House of Justice looks to rising generations of Bahá’ís to
wholeheartedly address a wide range of intellectual challenges,
overcome all pitfalls and obstacles, and render service for the
betterment of the world. In the decades ahead, then, a host of
believers will enter diverse social spaces and fields of human endeavor. To this arena, pregnant with possibilities, the Association
for Bahá’í Studies can offer an important contribution.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat
306

55
17 February 2014
To an individual Bahá’í
Dear Bahá’í Friend,
The House of Justice was sorry to hear of the continuing
difficulties you are experiencing as a devoted member of the
community of the Greatest Name and that the clarifications
provided in the letter dated 7 November 2010 written to you
on its behalf have not assisted in their resolution. It is well
aware of the challenges that some of the friends in the United
States are facing, which obstruct the progress of expansion
and consolidation. These challenges, however, lie not in the
provisions of the Plan itself but rather in misunderstandings
surrounding those provisions. The House of Justice observes
that, occasionally, the discussion concerning the Plan has fallen
into a misleading dichotomy: that individuals should engage
either in a few narrowly defined activities centered around the
training institute or that they should be free to choose any
initiative that they wish to undertake without regard for the
requirements of the Plan. Wherever this fruitless discussion
emerges, in whatever variation, the result is to reduce the
enthusiasm and participation of the believers and prevent them
from engaging in the process of learning that lies at the heart
of the Plan—a process that will, if unitedly and persistently
pursued, resolve misconceptions, promote flexibility, and shed
light over time on the most effective course of action.
The House of Justice hopes that you will reflect on how
this type of discussion may be inadvertently influencing your
own conceptions about the Plan. For example, you refer to
“teaching in very prescribed ways.” However, the guidance
concerning the Plan does not prescribe a particular method of
teaching, nor is any method of individual teaching proscribed.
You ask whether an individual is free to share views on the
progress of activities, yet it should be evident that such a
307

55.1

55.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

55.3

contribution is fundamental to the learning process, which
includes study of the guidance, consultation, action, and reflection. This, of course, should be carried out in a manner that
seeks to understand and effectively implement the provisions
of the Plan lest insistence upon personal opinions trap the
friends in interminable debate on dichotomous perspectives
and inhibit their understanding and action.
The essence of the series of Plans that have unfolded
since 1996 is relatively simple. Individuals, communities,
and institutions are called upon, within the context of a
cluster, to create a program of growth involving a vibrant,
meaningful, and distinctive pattern of collective Bahá’í life,
infused by the spirit of the Creative Word, and open not
only to the believers but to those from the wider society.
At the core of this community-building process are certain
activities—devotional gatherings, the educating of children
and junior youth, and the raising up of those who can engage
in acts of service—that serve as portals for the participation
of ever-increasing numbers. The four core activities are but
the nucleus of an organic pattern of life that, as the number of
individuals who can initiate activities multiplies, increases in
complexity over time, eventually requiring coherence among
a range of efforts that also includes visits to homes, social
gatherings, Feast and Holy Day observances, deepenings,
administration, strengthening the Fund, social action, involvement in the discourses of society, and so on. All these activities
are sustained and expanded by the constant endeavors of
individuals to reach out to their personal contacts as well as to
receptive populations through direct teaching, both personal
and collective, and engagement in meaningful conversations.
The process of building growing communities is cultivated
within three-monthly cycles of planning and action, and it is
supported by institutional arrangements at the local, cluster,
regional, national, and international levels. In far-flung regions
of the earth, the friends in diverse countries are learning to
advance the programs of growth in their clusters, ranging
from those with a few simple activities to those involving
hundreds of activities with the participation of thousands
of individuals in a pattern of life that is spiritual, dynamic,
united, growing, and transformative in nature. The House of
Justice has no doubt that the American believers—who have,
over the course of nearly a century of the unfoldment of the
308

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

Divine Plan, achieved a record of distinctive service—have the
capacity to stand among the vanguard of this process.
This does not mean, of course, that there are not currently
problems in understanding the Plan or putting into place its
provisions in various parts of the world, or that new challenges will not arise in the future. In the work of expansion
and consolidation, as the House of Justice has repeatedly
observed, mistakes will inevitably be made by the friends and
new challenges will present themselves. Obstacles, when they
arise, are ultimately resolved through perseverance and further
experience. Fruitless debate, insistence on personal views, creating false dichotomies, or the “tendency to reduce a complex
process of transformation into simplistic steps, susceptible to
instruction” can be carefully avoided or wisely overcome. It is
learning together that is yielding the insights necessary so that
“stumbling blocks can be made stepping stones for progress.”
In striving to overcome their difficulties and create new
patterns of action, the friends must, whether as individuals or
members of institutions, be mindful of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s admonition about the importance of love and fellowship and His
assurance that “it is in unity the truth will be revealed and the
wrong made right.” The system that Bahá’u’lláh has brought
into the world will take decades and centuries to unfold,
attaining ever-increasing levels of complexity, effectiveness,
and influence. Shoghi Effendi explained that “we must trust to
time, and the guidance of God’s Universal House of Justice, to
obtain a clearer and fuller understanding of its provisions and
implications.” He also warned that “the promised glories of
the Sovereignty which the Bahá’í teachings foreshadow, can be
revealed only in the fullness of time.”
The history of the development of the Faith offers a
useful perspective. In the first decades of the Formative Age,
the friends struggled with the new concepts and practices
pertaining to administration presented to them by Shoghi
Effendi, who carefully guided them over the years to resolve
their misconceptions and disagreements. “One of the main
reasons why the Faith does not advance more rapidly is
because the friends have not learned to live with, and work
within the framework of the Administrative Order,” a letter
written on his behalf stated. “Either they crystallize it into too
set a form, or they rebel against what they feel to be a System,
and do not give it sufficient support.” The challenge was to
309

55.4

55.5

55.6

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

55.7

55.8

learn to work according to the guidance given, not to set it
aside. Today, after more than nine decades, the Bahá’ís of the
world have raised the Administrative Order and forged new
relationships among individuals, communities, and institutions
on the basis of the exhortations found in the authoritative
texts. Much remains to be done, but there has been an obvious
and tremendous advance since the first years of the Formative
Age—an achievement affirmed not only by Bahá’ís themselves
but by a host of outside observers, who have remarked on the
unity and efficacy of Bahá’í undertakings in various local and
international arenas despite the fewness of our numbers. Since
1996, the believers have, addressing challenges pertaining
to the large-scale expansion of the Faith, been called on to
conduct their efforts within an evolving framework for action
that is required for the current stage of the unfoldment of the
Divine Plan. This includes further evolution not only in our
approach to growth but also in the associated administrative
arrangements, all under the guidance of the House of Justice.
Once again, in relation to the current requirements, the friends
must avoid the tendency to “crystallize” the guidance into “too
set a form” or “rebel against what they feel to be a System” and
fail to “give it sufficient support.” In response to such problems
in the past, Shoghi Effendi repeatedly urged the friends to
better understand the principles of Bahá’í administration and
strive to implement them properly. Similarly, the House of
Justice can do no more than this, encouraging the friends to
better understand the concepts and provisions of the Plan and
to strive to implement them effectively—for they are the basis
of the progress and development of the Faith in the decades
that lie ahead.
The House of Justice hopes that, despite any current challenges in your area, you find joy and abundant confirmations
through your wholehearted participation in the teaching field.
Beyond the general points outlined here, the clarification
of specific concerns you have raised is best carried out in the
context of your community, and you are advised to turn to your
National Spiritual Assembly.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

310

56
24 December 2014
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
Further to the letter dated 31 August 2014, sent to you on
behalf of the Universal House of Justice, we have been asked to
convey the following additional remarks to you.
In its 28 December 2010 message, addressed to the
Conference of the Continental Boards of Counsellors, the
House of Justice noted a number of innovations being introduced in relation to administrative arrangements in the most
advanced clusters, among them the division of clusters into
smaller units, the decentralization of the reflection meeting,
the assignment of assistants to institute coordinators, and the
deployment in teams of experienced friends to support others
in the field. Learning about the efficacy of these and other approaches, of course, continues across the globe. In April 2013,
the experience that had accrued up to that point was described
in the document “Insights from the Frontiers of Learning”
prepared by the International Teaching Centre, and the lessons
being learned will, no doubt, be further elaborated at the conclusion of the current Plan. Given the rapid changes occurring
in the manner that agencies of the Faith organize their work in
scores of clusters in the front ranks of the process of growth in
your country, it will be useful for all institutions and agencies
assisting them in this regard to consider the following points.
As you know, the basic scheme of coordination when
an intensive program of growth is established in a cluster
often comprises up to three institute coordinators and an Area
Teaching Committee of several members, who collaborate with
Auxiliary Board members. The further development of this
scheme in response to growth results from the understanding
obtained through an ongoing process of action, reflection,
311

56.1

56.2

56.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

56.4

56.5

consultation, and study carried out within the framework set
out by the House of Justice and the experience being gained
locally and across a region. Naturally, national and regional institutions guide the efforts of the friends in this regard, drawing,
as necessary, on the knowledge accumulating across the Bahá’í
world that usually reaches them through their interactions with
the Counsellors. They are careful, however, that any suggestions
they may offer those laboring at the grass roots of the community are not conveyed as instructions, for doing so could stifle
the rising capacity for learning among the local friends.
It is understood that the agencies of the Faith in most
of your clusters that are experiencing an acceleration in the
process of expansion and consolidation have taken the step of
dividing the cluster into smaller units for the purpose of
administering effectively the activities of the Plan. There are,
however, some clusters that cover very large geographic areas
where making such divisions might lead to needless complexity.
It appears that you have encouraged the friends in those cases
to partition the cluster into two or more clusters, applying
as much as possible the criteria established by the House of
Justice in its message dated 9 January 2001. Care is required to
ensure that the resulting clusters do not end up with such small
populations that the opportunities for the local friends to learn
about achieving large-scale growth are severely limited.
Where the activities of the Faith in a cluster are being administered in several units, the general scheme of coordination
has, naturally, become more complex. It is important, however,
that the friends guard against making cluster administration
overly complex or hierarchical as that could reduce the efficacy
of the entire scheme and inadvertently impede the flourishing of
relationships among the friends that are conducive to continued
progress. It might be possible, for instance, for additional
coordinators or assistants to coordinators to be assigned to
various parts of a cluster without effectively establishing
subordinate layers of cluster administration. Further, whatever
form the arrangements take, the friends assuming coordination
duties would need to be assisted to enhance their capacity to
effectively carry out their responsibilities and become sources of
constant encouragement to others if the cluster is to continue to
advance. As the House of Justice stated in its Rid.ván 2010 message to the Bahá’ís of the world, “sustained quantitative gains
will be contingent on qualitative progress.” This is a matter of
312

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

great importance that requires institutions and agencies at the
regional level to further develop their ability to formulate clear
approaches and plans to help those serving at the cluster level
to become increasingly adept at their work.
Another related matter concerns the facilitation of activities
in neighborhoods and villages. An increase in the number of
people engaged in community-building activities at that level
requires that the capacity to accompany these friends grows
considerably. As may have been experienced in your community, it would be unreasonable to expect that such capacity
would be built by simply assigning more and more coordinators
to a cluster. It is therefore heartening that the agencies of the
Faith in your most advanced clusters are learning to nurture
interactions among the friends serving together whereby those
more experienced in a particular act of service can support
others. Whatever terms are used to refer to such experienced
friends, it is better at this early stage not to consider them as
constituting a new position in the scheme of coordination that
requires formal appointment and official designations. To do
so might introduce rigidity into a mode of operation that, to be
effective, needs to remain dynamic and flexible.
At the level of neighborhoods and villages, continued
attention also needs to be given to the role that Local Spiritual
Assemblies are playing in supporting the efforts of the friends.
Your community is blessed with many well-established Local
Assemblies. Their efforts, in collaboration with Auxiliary Board
members and their assistants, to stimulate and encourage the
friends serving the Faith can be further augmented. This is an
area of learning that you and the Counsellors may want to explore during the remaining period of the Plan, focusing perhaps
on a few clusters and a selected number of Local Assemblies.
It is hoped that this might also aid you to gain some insights
into how encouragement and support offered to the friends by
Local Assemblies could contribute to keeping the expansion of
cluster-level structures within certain limits.
One matter that seemed to be of great concern to your
members during the consultations at the Bahá’í World Centre
was the rising number of friends who are serving the Faith fulltime and receiving some remuneration. While any impression
that individuals are to be compensated for offering service in
relation to the community-building activities of the Plan is to
be avoided, the growing complexity of the coordination work
313

56.6

56.7

56.8

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

56.9

56.10

in many clusters cannot be sustained solely through those who
are only able to give a portion of their time. It is necessary that
some friends dedicate themselves fully to such work in the cluster, but it is not realistic to expect that all of these, regardless of
circumstances and the time devoted to service, would be able
to do so on a purely voluntary basis. Some among them would,
no doubt, require financial assistance.
Such remuneration to friends serving at the cluster level is,
nonetheless, essentially a short-term arrangement. On the basis
of the experience in your country, you and the Counsellors may
find it helpful to determine what would, in general, constitute
a reasonable period during which an individual serving in a
coordination role at the cluster level may be provided with
remuneration. However, when the need to offer an individual
financial assistance is recognized, it might be useful for the
relevant agency to have a conversation with him or her in order
to ascertain legitimate needs and the period during which financial support will be necessary. While in the majority of cases
such support might be given by means of a stipend, in others,
alternative approaches may be employed. To decide the level
of assistance, factors that could be taken into consideration
include whether the person resides in a rural or urban area, is
required to change residence, has a family, or intends to pursue
further education. While differing circumstances of individuals
may call for various approaches, it is important to ensure that
there is a degree of consistency in terms of the remuneration offered. It is, of course, understandable that the institutions would
be unable to offer remuneration to an individual whose needs
exceed what can reasonably be met by the funds of the Faith.
Further, unless circumstances make it absolutely necessary, it
would be best to avoid offering remuneration to friends serving
at the level of the neighborhood or village.
The House of Justice is certain that your community will
continue to make a significant contribution to learning about
administrative arrangements in clusters in the front ranks of
the process of growth as the Bahá’í world draws closer to the
conclusion of the current Plan, and it will pray in the Holy
Shrines that Bahá’u’lláh may confirm your efforts.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

314

57
5 January 2015
The National Spiritual Assembly of
the Bahá’ís of the United States
Dearly loved Friends,
In November, the Universal House of Justice had the opportunity to consult with the International Teaching Centre and the
Counsellors serving North America. From these consultations,
as well as other recent occasions when the progress of growth
in your nation has been reviewed, the House of Justice noted
with pleasure the concentration of energies directed by your
institution to the progress of the Five Year Plan. You have
worked diligently and effectively, in close collaboration with
the Counsellors, to consolidate the changes brought about
by the reorganization of your regions in 2012. Attention has
been given to guiding Regional Bahá’í Councils, establishing
programs of growth in every goal cluster, and supporting the
work of learning sites and the associated institute coordinators
in nearly doubling the size and reach of the junior youth spiritual empowerment program. Steps have been taken to enhance
involvement in the life of society at the level of thought and
action. Beginning with the successful youth conferences held
last year, your community, like many others, has demonstrated
an ability to reach out to young people, Bahá’ís and others,
raising their vision and stimulating their desire to contribute to
the betterment of society, particularly by attending to the needs
of those younger than themselves. And most recently, there has
been renewed focus on engaging simultaneously in multiple
lines of action and ensuring coherence as you do so. Work in
each of these areas will, no doubt, be wisely and systematically
extended as the measures you have put into place to build
capacity for learning from the cluster to the national level
gradually bear fruit. This must include reinvigorating aspects of
the Plan that may have waned to some extent, such as the dyna315

57.1

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

57.2

mism of the regional institutes, the engagement of the generality
of the friends in a cluster in the pattern of community building,
and the efforts of Area Teaching Committees to maintain the
rhythm of three-month cycles of activity. In this regard, a few
comments are offered for your consideration.
A steady flow of individuals through the sequence of courses is required if the training institute is to prepare the human
resources necessary to respond to the demands of the process
of growth at ever-higher levels of complexity. The first stage in
the development of the institute process in your country drew
largely upon the participation of veteran believers. Another
considerable advance came when, following the regional
conferences in 2008 at the midpoint of the last Plan, there was
a marked upsurge in the involvement of the believers and their
friends in the institute process. And whilst it is clear that the
programs of the institute will continue to be offered to anyone,
what is equally clear is that your community is now poised for a
major turning point as you labor to realize the potential for the
movement of thousands of young people through the sequence
of courses. When buttressed by the wholehearted support of the
community, such a movement would not only lend impetus to
the advancement of clusters throughout the United States, but
this focus on working with so significant a number of youth
will also naturally shape the next phase of the development
of training institutes in your country. An effective approach to
attracting young people has already been demonstrated, first at
the conferences and subsequently in local gatherings. Attention
can now be directed to learning how to translate their initial
interest into systematic and well-integrated involvement in
community-building endeavors in a cluster. Among the questions to be addressed are how to deepen conversations and expand bonds of friendship within groups of youth, how to foster
and sustain acts of service, how to teach those who demonstrate
interest in the Faith, and how to combine the activities of the
youth within the larger pattern of cluster activities. Central to
this inquiry is to learn how to assist as many young people as
possible to study the sequence of courses in order to raise their
capacity and broaden the scope of their action. Efforts must be
redoubled, then, to strengthen regional institutes—enhancing
the functioning of their boards, their regional and subregional
arrangements, their cluster coordinators, and their tutors. By
learning how to raise up and accompany even a few dedicated
316

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

and effective tutors in each cluster, institutes can provide for the
capacity that is required for the movement of a sizable number
of individuals through the sequence of courses each year. The
national gathering for regional coordinators in November
appears to have contributed significantly to unity of thought
toward advancing these aims.
The capacity to reach young people and assist them in
carrying out acts of service, especially for establishing junior
youth groups and children’s classes in neighborhoods that
have become centers of intense activity, offers great promise
for the progress of clusters at every juncture along their path
of development. However, experience has demonstrated that
the process of community building falters if there is a sense
that the work of the Plan is confined to the young or to certain
neighborhoods alone. The House of Justice has emphasized
the importance of a two-pronged approach to expansion and
consolidation, involving endeavors throughout the localities in
a cluster as well as in one or more receptive neighborhoods.
The full pattern of activity envisioned for a thriving community
requires involvement of the generality of believers. The friends
everywhere can be assisted to overcome dichotomies, to grasp
the intent of the Plan’s community-building activities, and to
determine the place each will choose in contributing to the
collective effort.
The participation of greater numbers of individuals in
the activities of a cluster requires a strong Area Teaching
Committee. Regional Councils should be assisted to learn
systematically how these committees emerge organically, as a
program of growth intensifies, and contribute to the advancement of a cluster, cycle after cycle. The mobilization of individuals to ensure steady progress of the program of growth is the
principal focus of the Area Teaching Committee. It fosters the
process of reflection and planning by organizing the reflection
meeting, facilitating a sound reading of the cluster’s reality, and
arranging for the accurate gathering and careful analysis of its
statistics—all of which expand vision, build unity of thought,
and illuminate the path for the progress of the cluster. Just as
the training institute works closely to guide and accompany
the friends who initiate children’s classes, junior youth groups,
and study circles, the Area Teaching Committee can encourage
and support many individuals to carry out other acts of service,
such as hosting devotional gatherings, undertaking home visits,
317

57.3

57.4

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

57.5

57.6

and teaching the Faith. These are not merely activities to be
multiplied but fundamental aspects of Bahá’í community life
intended for all. Devotional gatherings, for example, steadily
multiply to include all of the believers in a cluster as well as
many of their associates. The teaching work is broad in scope,
encompassing personal efforts as well as collective projects,
selected neighborhoods as well as sundry localities, chosen
populations as well as chance acquaintances, firesides as well
as core activities. In this manner, the participation of more and
more believers in the community-building activities of the Plan
has profound implications at the level of culture. Devotional
gatherings, the embryo of the local Mashriqu’l-Adhkár, kindle
the stirrings of the spirit and ignite the flame of service. Visiting
one another’s homes weaves bonds of love and union. Teaching
becomes a way of life.
This attention to the strengthening of training institutes and
Area Teaching Committees will complement the efforts already
under way to accelerate the expansion of the junior youth
program. Indeed, a dynamic collaboration between the training
institutes and the learning sites will disseminate practices that
have proven to be effective so that the program can take root
in clusters throughout the country.
In The Advent of Divine Justice, that matchless call for
action to your stalwart community, Shoghi Effendi refers to
the “enthusiastic eagerness” of the believers in North America
“to arise and display, in the vast field traced for them by the
pen of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, their capacity to play their part in the
work of universal redemption proclaimed by Bahá’u’lláh”
when confronted by a world “dimmed by the steadily dying-out
light of religion, heaving with the explosive forces of a blind
and triumphant nationalism; scorched with the fires of pitiless
persecution, whether racial or religious; deluded by the false
theories and doctrines that threaten to supplant the worship of
God and the sanctification of His laws; enervated by a rampant
and brutal materialism; disintegrating through the corrosive
influence of moral and spiritual decadence; and enmeshed
in the coils of economic anarchy and strife.” The House of
Justice has every confidence in the ability of your institution
to reawaken this enthusiastic eagerness for service throughout
your community in order to raise expansion and consolidation
to unprecedented levels. It is evident that once you are able to
learn to replicate the pattern of intensive action within your
318

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

most advanced clusters in the hundreds of other clusters where
a program of growth has been initiated, it will be possible to
engage tens, and eventually hundreds of thousands of individuals in a vibrant, meaningful, and distinctive pattern of Bahá’í
community life, open to all. Be assured of the prayers of the
House of Justice at the Sacred Threshold that the friends in the
United States may realize this high aim in the years ahead.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

319

58
9 October 2015
To a National Spiritual Assembly
Dear Bahá’í Friends,
. . . As you know, technological advancement is integral to
the emergence of a global civilization. Indeed, the Internet is a
manifestation of a development anticipated by the Guardian
when, in describing the characteristics of a unified humanity, he
foresaw that a “mechanism of world intercommunication will
be devised, embracing the whole planet, freed from national
hindrances and restrictions, and functioning with marvelous
swiftness and perfect regularity.” Yet, learning to utilize the
Internet in a manner conducive to material and spiritual progress is an immense challenge.
The Internet makes it possible for Bahá’í and Bahá’íinspired content to become accessible to a wide audience.
In this connection, the House of Justice has encouraged the
strengthening of the official Bahá’í presence on the World Wide
Web, and it has been pleased to see the many advances made,
especially in recent years, and looks forward to the further
unfoldment of this process. Beyond that, many believers
around the world, each according to his or her circumstances
and in coherence with other endeavors of the community, use
the Internet as a medium for promoting Bahá’u’lláh’s vision of
a new World Order, and it is natural for the friends to explore
different ways to do so. However, given that the Internet allows
for the instantaneous dissemination of content among growing
multitudes, wisdom and self-discipline are required lest the
significance or dignity of the Teachings become compromised
by an unbecoming, inaccurate, or trivialized presentation.
A related consideration is that the institutions of the Faith
are charged with the responsibility for creating and maintaining
official sources of information about the Faith, such as national
and international websites, regularly assessing the presentation
321

58.1

58.2

58.3

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

58.4

of the Faith on the World Wide Web and providing the necessary guidance to individuals. The friends are generally free to
determine what aspects of the Teachings they wish to touch
upon in their contributions but in doing so should clearly
distinguish their sites from those created by the institutions.
This can be accomplished through a variety of means, including
the name, description, or design of a site. While in the past the
friends have at times been encouraged to refrain from using the
word “Bahá’í,” or forms of it, in the name of their websites,
experience has demonstrated that this may not always be
necessary if other aspects of the site unmistakably identify it as
an individual initiative. In addition, individuals will no doubt
wish to avoid a tone that could be perceived as authoritative or
instructional. They will also want to steer away from areas that
lie exclusively within the sphere of institutional responsibility,
such as offering a comprehensive collection of the writings
and of the messages of the House of Justice or an exhaustive
calendar of Bahá’í events across many countries. This becomes
particularly significant when the visibility of a website increases and it gains prominence. As the institutions guide the friends
in adopting the proper posture, the aim is not to unduly restrict
their efforts but to avoid confusion and misinformation.
Notwithstanding that a site may, of course, be accessed
from any part of the world, a Bahá’í who seeks to establish a
personal site should determine what would be an appropriate
audience to address and the scope of subjects to be covered.
For example, while it may be beneficial to reflect on the nature
and form of the core activities, especially in the context of
the experience of a cluster or region, certain problems arise
in attempting to create a site that aims to speak to Bahá’ís
worldwide about the subject. Such an approach could lead to
the cultural norms and values of a particular population being
promoted to a universal audience—a pattern all too prevalent
in the world today. There is also the danger of exerting an
unintended influence on the process of learning unfolding at
the grass roots, where individuals, communities, and institutions are acting as protagonists of their own growth and
development. The perspectives offered in the following extract
from the message dated 12 December 2011 from the House
of Justice to all National Spiritual Assemblies—although in
the specific context of artistic endeavors and supplementary

322

Extracts from Letters Written on Behalf of the Universal House of Justice

educational materials—are especially relevant to aspects of
culture mentioned above:
Propelled by forces generated both within and outside
the Bahá’í community, the peoples of the earth can be seen
to be moving from divergent directions, closer and closer
to one another, towards what will be a world civilization
so stupendous in character that it would be futile for us to
attempt to imagine it today. As this centripetal movement of
populations accelerates across the globe, some elements in
every culture, not in accord with the teachings of the Faith,
will gradually fall away, while others will be reinforced. By
the same token, new elements of culture will evolve over
time as people hailing from every human group, inspired by
the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh, give expression to patterns
of thought and action engendered by His teachings, in part
through artistic and literary works…. We long to see, for
instance, the emergence of captivating songs from every
part of the world, in every language, that will impress upon
the consciousness of the young the profound concepts enshrined in the Bahá’í teachings. Yet such an efflorescence of
creative thought will fail to materialize, should the friends
fall, however inadvertently, into patterns prevalent in the
world that give license to those with financial resources
to impose their cultural perspective on others, inundating
them with materials and products aggressively promoted.

58.5

An overarching principle which should guide the efforts of
the friends in their communications on the Internet pertains to
the use of language. Bahá’u’lláh refers to human utterance as
“an essence which aspireth to exert its influence and needeth
moderation,” and He enjoins His followers to “speak with
words as mild as milk, that the children of men may be nurtured and edified thereby and may attain the ultimate goal of
human existence which is the station of true understanding
and nobility.” The House of Justice in its letter dated 29
December 1988 to the Bahá’ís in the United States observed:
“Speech is a powerful phenomenon. Its freedom is both to be
extolled and feared. It calls for an acute exercise of judgment,
since both the limitation of speech and the excess of it can
lead to dire consequences.” With this in mind, Bahá’ís should
embody moderation, courtesy, and humility in any discussion
in which they take part—whether in person or online. They

58.6

323

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

should recognize and transcend negative habits of thought
and expression absorbed from society, often unconsciously,
and be on their guard lest they acquire the tendency to reduce
the Faith or the processes of the Divine Plan into a simplistic
or prescriptive set of points or steps, often conveyed in an
unjustifiably authoritative or irreverent tone, or presume to
speak with a voice that appears more representative than it
can ever be. In this regard, those managing various sites will
need to give thought to their own underlying attitudes that
may be conveyed through content and manner of expression.
In striving for such heightened consciousness, questions to
be reflected upon may, for instance, include: How will they
avoid the unthinking adoption of fads prevalent online that
may undermine their purpose? Is the type of humor employed
appropriate? How will the content be perceived by someone
who is not familiar with the Faith? As they aspire to achieve
the Bahá’í standard, the friends should endeavor to rise above,
rather than emulate, widely employed techniques of persuasion
and sensationalism, which are often reductive or crass, and
must always remain conscious that they are striving for “an
etiquette of expression worthy of the approaching maturity of
the human race.”
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Department of the Secretariat

324

PART III
Supplementary Material

59
Social Action

A paper prepared by the Office of Social
and Economic Development
at the Bahá’í World Centre
26 November 2012

In its Rid.ván 2010 message, the Universal House of Justice
called on the Bahá’ís of the world to reflect on the contributions
that their growing, vibrant communities will make to the
material and spiritual progress of society. In this connection, the
House of Justice made reference to the process of community
building set in motion in so many clusters across the globe by
the core activities associated with the current series of global
Plans. “A rich tapestry of community life,” it was noted, “begins
to emerge in every cluster as acts of communal worship, interspersed with discussions undertaken in the intimate setting of
the home, are woven together with activities that provide spiritual education to all members of the population—adults, youth
and children.” “Social consciousness is heightened naturally as,
for example,” the message went on to explain, “lively conversations proliferate among parents regarding the aspirations of
their children and service projects spring up at the initiative of
junior youth.” The House of Justice then made the following
statement: “Once human resources in a cluster are in sufficient
abundance, and the pattern of growth firmly established, the
community’s engagement with society can, and indeed must,
increase.” Later in the same message, the House of Justice
defined the sphere of social action in these terms:

59.1

Most appropriately conceived in terms of a spectrum,
social action can range from fairly informal efforts of
limited duration undertaken by individuals or small groups

59.2

327

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

of friends to programs of social and economic development
with a high level of complexity and sophistication implemented by Bahá’í-inspired organizations. Irrespective of its
scope and scale, all social action seeks to apply the teachings
and principles of the Faith to improve some aspect of the
social or economic life of a population, however modestly.
59.3

To contribute to discussions under way at all levels of
the Bahá’í community about the nature of its involvement
in social action, we have prepared this paper on the basis
of experience gained over the years in the area of social and
economic development. The insights presented are drawn from
relatively complex development endeavors, yet they shed light
on the character of initiatives across the entire spectrum, as all
instances of social action, irrespective of size, rely on a shared
set of concepts, principles, methods, and approaches.

I.	THE BAHÁ’Í WORLD’S INVOLVEMENT IN
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
59.4

59.5

The endeavors of the worldwide Bahá’í community can
be seen in terms of a number of interacting processes—the
spiritual enrichment of the individual, the development of local
and national communities, the maturation of administrative institutions, to mention but a few—which trace their origins back
to the time of Bahá’u’lláh Himself and which gathered strength
during the ministries of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi. Under
the guidance of the Universal House of Justice, these processes
have continued to advance steadily: the scope of their influence
has gradually been extended and new dimensions added to their
operation. Social and economic development is among them.
This particular process, pursued most notably through a variety
of educational activities down the years, received considerable
impetus in 1983, when the House of Justice, in a message dated
20 October, asked for “systematic attention” to be given to this
area of activity following the rapid expansion of the Bahá’í
community during the 1970s.
The 1983 message emphasized that progress in the development field would depend largely on natural stirrings at the grass
roots of the community. It also announced the establishment
of the Office of Social and Economic Development (OSED)
at the Bahá’í World Centre to “promote and coordinate the
activities of the friends” in this field. Bahá’ís in every continent
328

Supplementary Material
sought to respond to the call raised in the message in a number
of ways, and the ensuing ten years constituted a period of
experimentation, characterized simultaneously by enthusiasm
and hesitation, thoughtful planning and haphazard action,
achievements and setbacks. While most projects found it difficult to escape the patterns of development practice prevalent
in the world, some offered glimpses of promising paradigms
of action. From this initial decade of diverse activity, then, the
Bahá’í community emerged with the pursuit of social and economic development firmly established as a feature of its organic
life and with enhanced capacity to forge over time a distinctly
Bahá’í approach.
In September 1993, the document “Bahá’í Social and
Economic Development: Prospects for the Future,” prepared
at the World Centre, was approved by the Universal House of
Justice for use by OSED in orienting and guiding the work in
this area. It set the stage for the next ten years of activity and
beyond. Drawing on the significant body of experience that had
accumulated over the preceding decade, the document elaborated several features common to all such efforts. Awareness
worldwide of the nature of Bahá’í social and economic development grew significantly during this period as a result, and
a highly consistent, much more systematic approach began to
take shape. The vision that emerged at the time called for the
promotion of development activities at different levels of complexity. Most central to this vision was the question of capacity
building. That activities should start on a modest scale and only
grow in complexity in keeping with available human resources
was a concept that gradually came to influence development
thought and practice.
In 2001, the Universal House of Justice introduced to the
Bahá’í world the concept of a cluster—a geographic construct,
generally defined as a group of villages or as a city with its
surrounding suburbs, intended to assist in planning and implementing activities associated with community life. This step was
made possible by the establishment of training institutes at the
national and regional levels during the 1990s, which employed
a system of distance education to reach large numbers with a
sequence of courses designed to increase capacity for service.
The House of Justice encouraged the Bahá’í world to extend
this system progressively to more and more clusters in order to
promote their steady progress, laying first the strong spiritual
329

59.6

59.7

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.8

foundations upon which a vibrant community life is built.
Efforts in a cluster were initially to focus on the multiplication
of certain core activities, open to all of the inhabitants, but with
a view to developing the collective capacity needed to address
in due time various aspects of the social and economic life of
the population as well.
In the decade that followed, then, social action would
increasingly come to be conceived within the context of the
cluster. The conception of grassroots social action that began
to emerge was thus able to assume a much more pronounced
collective dimension than had been previously articulated.
During the same period, notable progress was also being made
by OSED in its attempts to help systematize the experience of
especially promising programs and to learn about structures
and methods required to enable communities around the
world not only to benefit from them but to contribute to their
further advancement. Today, in the establishment of continental
and subcontinental offices—each serving either a network of
sites for the dissemination of learning about the junior youth
spiritual empowerment program or a group of Bahá’í-inspired
organizations dedicated to the promotion of some other educational program—can be seen the first fruits of OSED’s efforts
to raise up structures across the globe to enhance collective
capacity for this purpose. Underscoring the importance of what
has been achieved so far, the Universal House of Justice wrote
in its message dated 28 December 2010:

59.9

Eventually the strength of the institute process in the
village, and the enhanced capabilities it has fostered in
individuals, may enable the friends to take advantage of
methods and programs of proven effectiveness, which have
been developed by one or another Bahá’í-inspired organization and which have been introduced into the cluster at the
suggestion of, and with support from, our Office of Social
and Economic Development.

59.10

Accomplishments over the past three decades in the area
of social and economic development, then, combined with the
consistent rise in human resources in clusters everywhere, have
brought the Bahá’í world to a new stage in its efforts to engage
in grassroots social action.

330

Supplementary Material

II. A FRAMEWORK FOR COLLECTIVE LEARNING
The mode of operation adopted in the area of social and
economic development, in common with other areas of Bahá’í
activity, is one of learning in action. When efforts are carried
out in a learning mode—characterized by constant action,
reflection, consultation, and study—visions and strategies
are reexamined time and again. As tasks are accomplished,
obstacles removed, resources multiplied, and lessons learned,
modifications are made in goals and methods. The learning process, which is given direction through appropriate institutional
arrangements, unfolds in a way that resembles the growth
and differentiation of a living organism. Haphazard change is
avoided, and continuity of action maintained.
On several occasions, the Universal House of Justice, referring to the way in which those serving at the level of the cluster
will be drawn further and further into the life of society, has
indicated: “In the approaches you take, the methods you adopt,
and the instruments you employ, you will need to achieve the
same degree of coherence that characterizes the pattern of
growth presently under way.” How the first stirrings in the
area of social action will manifest themselves in cluster after
cluster where the dual process of expansion and consolidation
is robust, the extent to which cultivation and direction from the
institutions will be required, and the ways in which endeavors
of social action will strengthen the fabric of community
life—these are among the issues that will be the subject of an
increasingly intense process of learning in the coming years.
Achieving progressively higher degrees of coherence both
within and among the broad interconnected fields of endeavor
in which the Bahá’í community is engaged is clearly a vital
concern. It suggests that areas of activity are to be complementary, integrated, and mutually supportive. Further, it implies
the existence of a common, overarching framework that gives
shape to activities and which evolves and becomes more elaborate as experience accumulates. The expression of the divers
elements of the framework will not, of course, be uniform in
all spheres of action. In relation to any given area of activity,
some elements move to the fore, while others act only in the
background. The next three sections of this document describe
a few of these, identified over many years of experience, as they
find expression in social action.

331

59.11

59.12

59.13

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
59.14

59.15

59.16

Among the elements most relevant to social action are statements that define the character of progress—that civilization
has both a material and a spiritual dimension, that humanity
is on the threshold of its collective maturity, that there are
destructive and constructive forces operating in the world
which serve to propel humanity along the path towards its full
maturity, that the relationships necessary to sustain society
must be recast in the light of Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation, that
the transformation required must occur simultaneously within
human consciousness and the structure of social institutions.
Such statements shed light on the nature of Bahá’í development
efforts, a topic taken up in Section III of the document.
Other elements that speak to the nature of social action are
derived from a particular perspective on the role of knowledge
in the development of society. The complementarity of science
and religion, the imperative of spiritual and material education,
the influence of values inherent to technology on the organization of society, and the relevance of appropriate technology to
social progress are among the issues involved. Views related to
the generation and application of knowledge have implications
not only for the nature of development but also for the question
of methodology, which is the theme of Section IV. Implicit in the
discussions of Sections III and IV is yet another set of elements
of the framework, namely, those statements that analyze concepts such as individualism, power, authority, personal comfort,
selfless service, work, and excellence.
Finally, at the heart of the conceptual framework for social
action lie elements that describe beliefs about fundamental
issues of existence, such as the nature of the human being, the
purpose of life, the oneness of humanity, and the equality of
men and women. While for Bahá’ís these touch on immutable
convictions, they are not static—the way in which they are
understood and find expression in various contexts evolves over
time. Many of these convictions underlie the discussion elaborated throughout the document; a few are explicitly addressed in
Section V to illustrate their implications for development work.

III.	THE NATURE OF BAHÁ’Í SOCIAL AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
59.17

Bahá’í activity in the field of social and economic development seeks to promote the well-being of people of all walks
of life, whatever their beliefs or background. It represents the
332

Supplementary Material
efforts of the Bahá’í community to effect constructive social
change, as it learns to apply the teachings of the Faith, together
with knowledge accumulated in different fields of human
endeavor, to social reality. Its purpose is neither to proclaim the
Cause nor to serve as a vehicle for conversion. What follows
below is a discussion of some of the elements of the conceptual
framework that help to define its nature.
(i) Coherence between the spiritual and the material
An exploration of the nature of social action, undertaken
from a Bahá’í perspective, must necessarily place it in the
broad context of the advancement of civilization. That a global
civilization which is both materially and spiritually prosperous
represents the next stage of a millennia-long process of social
evolution provides a conception of history that endows every
instance of social action with a particular purpose: to foster
true prosperity, with its spiritual and material dimensions,
among the diverse inhabitants of the planet. A concept of
vital relevance, then, is the imperative to achieve a dynamic
coherence between the practical and spiritual requirements of
life. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá states that while “material civilization is one
of the means for the progress of the world of mankind,” until it
is “combined with Divine civilization, the desired result, which
is the felicity of mankind, will not be attained.” He continues:

59.18

Material civilization is like a lamp-glass. Divine civilization is the lamp itself and the glass without the light
is dark. Material civilization is like the body. No matter
how infinitely graceful, elegant and beautiful it may be, it
is dead. Divine civilization is like the spirit, and the body
gets its life from the spirit, otherwise it becomes a corpse.
It has thus been made evident that the world of mankind is
in need of the breaths of the Holy Spirit. Without the spirit
the world of mankind is lifeless, and without this light the
world of mankind is in utter darkness.

59.19

To seek coherence between the spiritual and the material
does not imply that the material goals of development are to be
trivialized. It does require, however, the rejection of approaches
to development which define it as the transfer to all societies of
the ideological convictions, the social structures, the economic
practices, the models of governance—in the final analysis, the

59.20

333

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.21

59.22

very patterns of life—prevalent in certain highly industrialized
regions of the world. When the material and spiritual dimensions of the life of a community are kept in mind and due
attention is given to both scientific and spiritual knowledge, the
tendency to reduce development to the mere consumption of
goods and services and the naive use of technological packages
is avoided. Scientific knowledge, to take but one simple example, helps the members of a community to analyze the physical
and social implications of a given technological proposal—say,
its environmental impact—and spiritual insight gives rise to
moral imperatives that uphold social harmony and that ensure
technology serves the common good. Together, these two
sources of knowledge tap roots of motivation in individuals and
communities, so essential in breaking free from the shelter of
passivity, and enable them to uncover the traps of consumerism.
Although the relevance of scientific knowledge to development efforts is readily acknowledged in the world at large, there
appears to be less agreement on the part to be played by religion. Too often views about religion carry with them notions of
division, strife, and repression, creating a reluctance to turn to it
as a source of knowledge—even among those who question the
adequacy of entirely materialistic approaches. Interestingly, the
high esteem in which science is held does not necessarily imply
that its practice and purpose are well understood. Its underlying
meaning, too, is surrounded by misconception. Not infrequently
it is conceived in terms of the application of certain techniques
and formulas, which, as if by magic, lead to this or that effect.
It is not surprising, then, that what is considered to be religious
knowledge is not in harmony with science, and much of what is
propagated in the name of science denies the spiritual capacities
cultivated by religion.
Social action, of whatever size and complexity, should strive
to remain free of simplistic and distorted conceptions of science
and religion. To this end, an imaginary duality between reason
and faith—a duality that would confine reason to the realm of
empirical evidence and logical argumentation and which would
associate faith with superstition and irrational thought—must
be avoided. The process of development has to be rational and
systematic—incorporating, for example, scientific capabilities
of observing, of measuring, of rigorously testing ideas—and at
the same time deeply aware of faith and spiritual convictions. In
the words of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá: “faith compriseth both knowledge
334

Supplementary Material
and the performance of good works.” Faith and reason can best
be understood as attributes of the human soul through which
insights and knowledge can be gained about the physical and
the spiritual dimensions of existence. They make it possible to
recognize the powers and capacities latent in individuals and
in humanity as a whole and enable people to work for the
realization of these potentialities.
(ii) Participation
A civilization befitting a humanity which, having passed
through earlier stages of social evolution, is coming of age
will not emerge through the efforts exerted by a select group
of nations or even a network of national and international
agencies. Rather, the challenge must be faced by all of humanity.
Every member of the human family has not only the right to
benefit from a materially and spiritually prosperous civilization
but also an obligation to contribute towards its construction.
Social action should operate, then, on the principle of universal
participation.
Issues related to participation have been discussed at length
in development literature. Yet, in both theory and practice, this
vital principle has often been approached at the level of technique—for example, through the utilization of surveys and focus groups. Such tools, of course, have their merits, as do more
ambitious efforts intended to increase participation in political
processes or to offer training to the beneficiaries of services
delivered by one or another governmental or nongovernmental
agency. Still, these measures seem to fall short of the kind of
participation envisioned above. What appears to be called for
in any given region, microregion or cluster is the involvement
of a growing number of people in a collective process of
learning, one which is focused on the nature and dynamics of
a path that conduces to the material and spiritual progress of
their villages or neighborhoods. Such a process would allow
its participants to engage in the generation, application, and
diffusion of knowledge, a most potent and indispensable force
in the advancement of civilization.
In this connection, it is important to realize that the application and propagation of existing knowledge is invariably
accompanied by the generation of new knowledge—much of
which takes the form of insights acquired through experience.
335

59.23

59.24

59.25

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.26

Here the systematization of learning is crucial. As a group of
people working at the grass roots begins to gain experience
in social action, the first lessons learned may consist of little
more than occasional stories, anecdotes, and personal accounts.
Over time, patterns tend to emerge which can be documented
and carefully analyzed. To facilitate the systematization of
knowledge, appropriate structures have to be put in place at the
local level, among them institutions and agencies invested with
authority to safeguard the integrity of the learning process and
to ensure that it is not reduced to opinion or the mere collection
of various experiences—in short, to see to it that veritable
knowledge is generated. In this regard, the authority invested
in the institutions of the Administrative Order working at the
grass roots to harmonize individual volition with collective will
endows the Bahá’í community with a remarkable capacity to
nurture participation.
No matter how essential, a process of learning at the local
level will remain limited in its effectiveness if it is not connected
to a global process concerned with the material and spiritual
prosperity of humanity as a whole. Structures are required,
then, at all levels, from the local to the international, to facilitate learning about development. At the international level,
such learning calls for a degree of conceptualization that takes
into account the broader processes of global transformation
under way and which serves to adjust the overall direction of
development activities accordingly. In this respect, OSED sees
itself as a learning entity dedicated to the systematization of
a growing worldwide experience made possible by the participation of increasing numbers of individuals, agencies, and
communities. As this participation widens, the Office strives to
develop its own capacity to observe activity at the grass roots,
to identify and analyze patterns that emerge under one or more
sets of circumstances, and to disseminate the knowledge thus
generated, strengthening structures for this purpose and lending
impetus to the process of learning at all levels. The approach to
development that comes into focus, then, defies categorization
into either “top-down” or “bottom-up”; it is one, rather, of
reciprocity and interconnectedness.
(iii) Capacity building

59.27

When development is seen in terms of the participation of
more and more people in a collective process of learning, then
336

Supplementary Material
the concept of capacity building assumes particular importance.
Thus, while any instance of social action would naturally
aim at improving some aspect of the life of a population, it
cannot focus simply on the provision of goods and services—an
approach to development so prevalent in the world today, one
which often carries with it attitudes of paternalism and which
employs methods that disempower those who should be the
protagonists of change. Setting and achieving specific goals to
improve conditions is a legitimate concern of social action; yet,
far more essential is the accompanying rise in the capacity of
the participants in an endeavor to contribute to progress. Of
course, the imperative to build capacity is not only relevant
to the individual, important though that may be; it is equally
applicable to institutions and the community, the other two
protagonists in the advancement of civilization.
At the level of the individual, the influence of the training
institute is vital. As it helps to equip individuals with the
spiritual insights and knowledge, the qualities and attitudes,
and the skills and abilities needed to carry out acts of service
integral to Bahá’í community life, the institute creates a pool
of human resources that makes it possible for endeavors of
social and economic development to flourish. The participants
in such endeavors are able to acquire, in turn, knowledge and
skills pertinent to the specific areas of action in which they are
engaged—health, agricultural production, and education, to
name but a few—while continuing to strengthen those capacities already cultivated by the institute, for instance, fostering
unity in diversity, promoting justice, participating effectively in
consultation, and accompanying others in their efforts to serve
humanity.
Similarly, the question of institutional capacity requires
due attention. As the institutions of the Faith gain experience,
particularly in the context of their efforts to ensure that the
provisions of the global Plans are met, they become increasingly
adept at offering assistance, resources, encouragement, and
loving guidance to appropriate initiatives; at consulting freely
and harmoniously among themselves and with people they
serve; and at channeling individual and collective energies
towards the transformation of society. So, too, must every effort
pursued in the sphere of social action consider the question
of institutional capacity. After all, even the smallest group of
individuals laboring at the grass roots must be able to main337

59.28

59.29

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.30

59.31

59.32

tain a consultative environment characterized by qualities of
honesty, fairness, patience, tolerance, and courtesy. At a higher
level of complexity, an organization dedicated to social action
needs to develop the capacity to read society and identify the
forces operating within it, to translate a vision of progress into
projects and distinct, interconnected lines of action, to manage
financial resources, and to interact with both governmental and
nongovernmental agencies.
The building of capacity in individuals and institutions
goes hand in hand with the development of communities. In
villages and neighborhoods throughout the world, Bahá’ís
are engaged in activities that enrich the devotional character
of their communities, that tend to the spiritual education of
children, that enhance the spiritual perception of junior youth
and strengthen their powers of expression, and that enable
increasing numbers to explore the application of the teachings
of the Faith to their individual and collective lives. A process
of community development, however, needs to reach beyond
the level of activity and concern itself with those modes of
expression and patterns of thought and behavior that are to
characterize a humanity which has come of age. In short, it
must enter into the realm of culture. Viewed in this light, social
action can become an occasion to raise collective consciousness
of such vital principles as oneness, justice, and the equality of
women and men; to promote an environment distinguished
by traits such as truthfulness, equity, trustworthiness, and
generosity; to enhance the ability of a community to resist the
influence of destructive social forces; to demonstrate the value
of cooperation as an organizing principle for activity; to fortify
collective volition; and to infuse practice with insight from the
teachings. For, in the final analysis, many of the questions most
central to the emergence of a prosperous global civilization are
to be addressed at the level of culture.
What seems necessary to acknowledge here is that the
increase of capacity in each of these three protagonists does not
occur in isolation; the development of any one is inextricably
linked to the progress of the other two. The following statement
of Shoghi Effendi speaks to this point:
We cannot segregate the human heart from the environment
outside us and say that once one of these is reformed
everything will be improved. Man is organic with the
world. His inner life molds the environment and is itself
338

Supplementary Material
also deeply affected by it. The one acts upon the other and
every abiding change in the life of man is the result of these
mutual reactions.
(iv) Degrees of complexity
That the development process is inherently complex is
undeniable. It can involve activity in areas such as agriculture
and animal husbandry, manufacturing and marketing, the
management of funds and natural resources, health and
sanitation, education and socialization, communication and
community organization. The knowledge that must be brought
to bear on the development concerns of the communities of
the world, then, does not fit into a single area or discipline.
Interdisciplinary and multisectoral action is clearly called for.
Yet the capacity to pursue such coordinated action will only
appear in the Bahá’í community over the course of decades, as
will the capacity to address development issues at increasingly
higher levels of complexity and effectiveness.
Social action can range from fairly informal efforts of
limited duration undertaken by small groups of individuals
to programs of social and economic development with some
level of complexity and sophistication implemented by
Bahá’í-inspired organizations. Experience makes clear that
the interplay of processes that give rise to social action does
not lend itself to a single formulaic description. Irrespective
of circumstances, however, the scope and complexity of social
action at any given moment must be commensurate with the
human resources available in a community to carry it forward.
What is more, ownership of the undertaking rests with the
community itself, which suggests the existence of a certain
degree of collective will.
Efforts, whatever their specific nature, generally begin
on a modest scale. Often, in a locality where the educational
activities of the training institute are firmly established and a
pronounced sense of community exists, the first stirrings of
heightened social awareness can be observed in the emergence
of a small group which, addressing a particular social and economic reality, initiates a simple set of appropriate actions. While
some efforts of this kind will naturally come to a close when
their objectives have been met, others will continue. Insistence
on perpetuating or even expanding every initiative, whether
339

59.33

59.34

59.35

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.36

59.37

in terms of number of participants, expenditure, geographical
coverage or complexity of work, is counterproductive. Yet
there may be circumstances in which efforts will, through a
continuous process of consultation, action, and reflection,
give rise to an endeavor of a more sustained nature. What is
important in such cases is that those involved be allowed to
increase the range of their activities in an organic fashion,
without undue pressure from opinions that are often based
solely on theoretical considerations. The process moves forward
in a flexible way as they reflect on the results of experience. The
Local Spiritual Assembly, of course, serves as the voice of moral
authority to make certain that, as small groups of individuals
strive to improve conditions, the integrity of their endeavors is
not compromised. It also remains ever vigilant, ensuring that
efforts do not run counter to the overall direction in which the
community is moving.
At some point, members of the community may also be
able to take advantage of educational programs promoted by a
Bahá’í-inspired organization operating in the region, supported
by OSED. The steady expansion of such a program in the
community will serve to increase its human resources and to
reinforce organizational structures that sustain ongoing work.
Eventually many of those who benefit from such programs will,
in turn, bend their energies towards the implementation of the
kind of grassroots social action mentioned above. Yet, here
again, whatever the ultimate vision, care is taken to begin work
in a single area of action and to expand activities gradually
over time. A community school, for example, can in principle
become a center for activities such as agricultural production,
health education, and family counseling. But, in most cases, it
is advisable for it to start simply as a school, focusing all of its
resources on the children it proposes to serve.
In this respect, OSED’s efforts to strengthen the institutional
capacity of Bahá’í-inspired organizations take on significance,
and a few words should be added here about the appearance of
such organizations worldwide. Whether in the practice of their
professions, in the discharge of occupational responsibilities, or
in dealings of other kinds, all Bahá’ís derive inspiration from
the teachings and principles of the Faith and endeavor to reflect
their high standards in day-to-day interactions. Further, given
the nature of the field of development, a number of Bahá’ís will
choose to associate themselves with one or another national or
340

Supplementary Material
international agency working for the good of humankind and
will, to the extent possible, bring Bahá’í teachings to bear on
their operations. In this sense their efforts are inspired by the
Faith. Yet, in the context of the work of the Bahá’í community
itself, the term has come to be used in a very specific way.
Typically brought into being by a small group of believers, a
Bahá’í-inspired organization—while remaining under the general guidance and moral authority of Bahá’í institutions—can
pursue a range of development initiatives in a region with a
degree of latitude in administrating its daily affairs. When such
an organization is established, emphasis is naturally placed
on the quality of its activities; clarity about an optimal size is
gradually achieved as the notion that “bigger is better” is set
aside. Bahá’í institutions and agencies, including OSED, provide
encouragement and direction and, where appropriate, channel
resources to these organizations. A small handful of these
have, over many years, evolved into fully fledged development
organizations with the capacity to engage in relatively complex
areas of activity and to establish working relations with the
agencies of government and civil society.
However useful the concept of a Bahá’í-inspired organization may be, its application under divers circumstances requires
careful consideration. The way that such an organization
emerges from the life of a region and contributes to its progress is of paramount importance. Its establishment cannot be
haphazard, nor can its creation proceed solely from the longing
of two or three individuals to fulfill a personal, albeit altruistic,
desire. A Bahá’í-inspired organization operating in a region derives meaning, in part, from its relationship to other activities; it
is one of several interacting endeavors through which consistent
progress is achieved. The value of such organizations in the different regions of the world to the development work is evident.
Yet, the transformative power of thousands upon thousands of
simple actions undertaken at the grass roots tied together in a
common framework should not be underestimated.

59.38

(v) Flow of resources
All Bahá’í activity is carried forward in light of a fundamental belief in the oneness of humankind. All contribute their
talents and resources to the advancement of a common purpose,
and all share in the joy of progress. Clearly, then, the emphasis
341

59.39

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.40

59.41

59.42

59.43

placed on local action should not be construed as favoring
isolation.
Social and economic development requires the flow of
resources, both material and intellectual. Bahá’í communities
are linked by institutions and agencies at the local, regional,
national, continental, and international levels, each committed
to upholding the principle of the oneness of humankind. These
institutional arrangements allow for resources to flow in a
structured and systematic manner, and communities in rural
areas as well as in highly industrialized regions benefit equally
from them. The practice of dividing the world into dichotomous
groups of “the developed” and “the underdeveloped,” of “the
advanced” and “the backward,” is foreign to Bahá’í efforts in
the field of development—indeed, to all Bahá’í endeavors.
However, it should be acknowledged plainly that poverty
cannot be alleviated without a just distribution of material
wealth among the peoples of the world. In fact, the institution
of H
. uqúqu’lláh provides a powerful means for fostering
the prosperity of humankind. As they observe the law of
H
. uqúqu’lláh, which requires them to offer a percentage of their
excess wealth, Bahá’ís across the globe understand that, by
placing funds at the disposal of the Universal House of Justice,
they are facilitating the transfer of material resources in ways
that promote the welfare of society. At this point, the amounts
available fall far short of the needs of the vast regions of the
planet that lack the requisite financial means. Nevertheless,
the observance of this law makes it possible for the House of
Justice to provide funds to development projects under way in
all continents.
Apart from the funds accessible through the institution of
H
uqúqu’lláh
and regular contributions made to other institu.
tions, including those earmarked specifically for social action,
efforts in the area of social and economic development can tap
into resources available from governments and donor agencies.
Yet, irrespective of their sources, in no way do such funds set
the agenda for development efforts in the communities that
accept assistance. The relationship of dependence so prevalent
in the world today, whereby certain regions are beholden to
others for access to resources, is unacceptable.
“Social change,” the Universal House of Justice made clear
in its Rid.ván 2010 message, “is not a project that one group
of people carries out for the benefit of another,” and in general
342

Supplementary Material
Bahá’ís from one area do not establish development projects
for others. The movement of individuals from community to
community, and across borders, does occur however, and here
every Bahá’í is guided by the words of Bahá’u’lláh: “Shut your
eyes to estrangement, then fix your gaze upon unity.” When
Bahá’ís move residence or travel to another place in the context
of some work, they form part of the collectivity of their new
local communities, and all the others also see them as such.
They now come under the guidance of local institutions, which
are responsible for facilitating the flow of knowledge and for
channeling the energies of every member of their communities;
the idea of an expert from outside being allowed to impose his
or her professional aspirations on the local population is thus
avoided.
In the efforts of Bahá’ís everywhere, then, can be seen the
emergence of a global community which, connected through
its institutions, is striving to establish a pattern of activity
that gives due respect to local autonomy without creating a
sense of isolation from the whole, that attaches importance to
material means without allowing them to become instruments
of control, that provides for the flow of knowledge without
introducing paternalistic attitudes, that strengthens capacity in
individuals without any regard for their economic background.
While vigorously engaged in activities to improve their immediate surroundings, Bahá’ís feel part of a process of development
that is global in scope and influence.

59.44

IV. THE METHODOLOGY OF BAHÁ’Í SOCIAL
AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
In addition to those elements of the conceptual framework
that define the nature of Bahá’í development efforts, there are
a number of concepts which shed light on the methods to be
adopted. That the collective investigation of reality can best be
undertaken in an atmosphere which encourages detachment
from personal views, that such an ongoing investigation
should give due importance to valid empirical information,
that mere opinion should not be raised to the status of fact,
that conclusions should correspond to the complexity of the
issues at hand and not be broken up into a series of simplistic
points, that the articulation of observations and conclusions
should be presented in precise and dispassionate language,
that progress in every area of endeavor is contingent upon the
343

59.45

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

creation of an environment where powers are multiplied and
manifest themselves in unified action—general concepts such as
these, drawn from both science and religion, inform the specific
methodological perspective discussed below.
(i) Reading society and formulating a vision
59.46

59.47

59.48

As mentioned earlier, endeavors in the sphere of social
action frequently take the form of modest acts carried out by
small groups of individuals residing in a locality. In a sense,
these stirrings at the grass roots can be considered responses
to readings of social reality, even though they are seldom
expressed explicitly as such at that level. For more elaborate
endeavors of social and economic development, reading society
with higher and higher degrees of accuracy has to become an
explicit element of the methodology of learning.
Every development effort can be said to represent a
response to some understanding of the nature and state of
society, its challenges, the institutions operating in it, the forces
influencing it, and the capacities of its peoples. To read society
in this way is not to explore every detail of the social reality.
Nor does it necessarily involve formal studies. Conditions need
to be understood progressively, both from the perspective of
a particular endeavor’s purpose and in the context of a vision
of humanity’s collective existence. Indeed, it is vital that the
reading of society be consistent with the teachings of the Faith.
That the true nature of a human being is spiritual, that every
human being is a “mine rich in gems” of limitless potential, that
the forces of integration and disintegration each in their own
way are propelling humanity towards its destiny are but a few
examples of teachings that would shape one’s understanding
of social reality. Bahá’í-inspired organizations supporting
relatively complex lines of action need to continually refine
their reading of society, using the methods of science to the best
of their abilities.
It is important to note that reading the social reality of a
population from within is different than studying it as an outsider. In instances where the population in question is relatively
poor in material resources, outsiders with access to greater
means frequently see only deprivation—the wealth of talent in
the population, the aspirations of its members, and their capacity to arise and become the protagonists of change may all be
overlooked. Furthermore, external observers of poverty are all
344

Supplementary Material
too often unaware of the tendency to allow their own feelings
of pity, fear, indignation or ambivalence to affect their reading
of society and to base their proposed solutions on the value
they place on their own experiences. However, when an effort
is participatory, in the sense that it seeks to involve the people
themselves in the generation and application of knowledge, as
all forge together a path of progress, dualities such as “outsider-insider” and “knowledgeable-ignorant” quickly disappear.
According to their reading of society, those engaged in
social action form and refine a vision of their work within the
social space available to them. The word “vision” here does not
simply mean a set of goals or a description of an idealized future condition. Particularly when a Bahá’í-inspired organization
is involved, a vision has to express a general idea of how goals
are to be achieved: the nature of the strategies to be devised, the
approaches to be taken, the attitudes to be assumed, and even
an outline of some of the methods to be employed. The vision of
work articulated by such an organization is never complete; it
has to become more and more precise, be able to accommodate
constantly evolving and ever more complex action, and attain
increasingly high levels of accuracy in its operation.

59.49

(ii) Consultation
If learning in action is to be the primary mode of operation in
the area of social and economic development, the Bahá’í principle
of consultation needs to be fully appreciated. Whether concerned
with analyzing a specific problem, attaining higher degrees of
understanding on a given issue, or exploring possible courses of
action, consultation may be seen as collective search for truth.
Participants in a consultative process see reality from different
points of view, and as these views are examined and understood,
clarity is achieved. In this conception of the collective investigation of reality, truth is not a compromise between opposing
interest groups. Nor does the desire to exercise power over one
another animate participants in the consultative process. What
they seek, rather, is the power of unified thought and action.
In the context of social action, the principle of consultation
is expressed in a variety of forms, each appropriate to the
space within which it occurs. Often, when a small group is
engaged in an endeavor, every matter of concern is the subject
of consultation. Yet, within an organization, the principle will
find expression in different ways. What should be noted in this
345

59.50

59.51

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.52

59.53

connection is that, at times, consultation is undertaken between
those regarded as equals with the aim of reaching a joint decision, as in the case of the deliberations of a Spiritual Assembly.
Under other circumstances, it takes the form of a discussion,
as may be necessary, to draw out thoughts and information
towards the enrichment of common understanding, but with
the decision being made by those with authority. It is this latter
form that would distinguish the operations of a Bahá’í-inspired
organization, where a degree of individual or group authority
is given to those on whom responsibility has been conferred.
Clearly, then, not every person within an organization will
participate equally in making every decision. Responsibility
needs to be appropriately structured and defined. For example,
there will be many spaces in which individuals involved in a
particular component of the work will have the opportunity to
share insights, reach higher levels of understanding, and make
certain decisions pertaining to their area of functioning. In the
case of an organization with a board and an executive director,
they will often take decisions without the need to consult with
every member of the organization. But theirs is also the responsibility to create an atmosphere in which relevant information and
knowledge flow openly and in which the results of consultation
in all the spaces of the organization are conveyed in ways that
promote understanding and consensus among its members.
Beyond such considerations, a consultative spirit pervades
the interactions of those engaged in social action, of whatever
size and complexity, and the population they serve. This does
not imply that formal mechanisms are necessarily in place
for this purpose. It suggests, rather, that the aspirations of
the people, their observations and ideas, are ever present and
are consciously incorporated into plans and programs.
(iii) Action and reflection on action

59.54

At the heart of every development endeavor is consistent,
systematic action. Action, however, needs to be accompanied by
constant reflection to ensure that it continues to serve the aims
of the endeavor. Development strategies that are formulated
simply in terms of projects with well-stated goals, followed by
evaluation of how and why they were or were not achieved,
have limitations. An approach to development defined in terms
of learning does, at times, admit formal evaluation. Yet, it
346

Supplementary Material
depends far more on structured reflection woven into a pattern
of action, through which questions can emerge and methods
and approaches be adjusted.
Given the multitude of humanity’s needs and the enthusiasm with which programs inspired by the teachings of the Faith
are frequently received, it can be tempting for a Bahá’í-inspired
organization to try to pursue every opportunity and become engaged in frenetic action. Learning to be systematic and focused
is a challenge that all those involved in development efforts,
from a small group to the community itself, have to meet.
A notion that has proven useful in this respect is that of a
line of action. A line of action is conceived as a sequence of activities, each of which builds on the previous one and prepares
the way for the next. Endeavors often begin with a single line
of action, but gradually a number of interrelated lines emerge,
constituting a whole area of action. For example, to be effective,
even an effort at the grass roots focusing solely on the area of
child education needs to simultaneously follow such lines of
action as the training of teachers and consciousness-raising in
the community about education, as well as attending to the
teaching-learning experience.
Focused, systematic thinking and persistent, meticulous
labor do not, of course, detract from the spirit of service that
animates social action. While paying attention to the smallest practical details, one can be occupied with the most profound spiritual matters. A distinguishing feature of any Bahá’í
endeavor has to be the emphasis it places on the spirit with
which action is undertaken. This requires from the participants
purity of motive, rectitude of conduct, humility, selflessness, and
respect for human dignity. As Bahá’u’lláh states:
One righteous act is endowed with a potency that can so
elevate the dust as to cause it to pass beyond the heaven of
heavens. It can tear every bond asunder, and hath the power
to restore the force that hath spent itself and vanished.

59.55

59.56

59.57

59.58

(iv) Utilizing material means
To accomplish their aims, endeavors in the area of social
action require material means. There is a tendency among many
organizations in the world—including those working to achieve
praiseworthy ends—to measure success principally in terms of
the amount of money received and spent. Bahá’í development
347

59.59

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

59.60

59.61

59.62

efforts are expected to set aside such criteria. In modest instances of social action, resources are typically contributed by
the community. A more complex endeavor will have to acquire
greater capacity to draw upon and utilize funds. In the case of
a Bahá’í-inspired organization, this may extend, as mentioned
earlier, to receiving grants from donor agencies. Here great
care is required to ensure that, in attempting to secure funds,
an organization is not distracted from its primary purpose:
capacity building within a given population.
However modest the amounts expended may be, it is vital
that a system be put in place to oversee the proper management
of finances. The integrity of an endeavor is, of course, secured
by the trustworthiness and honesty of its participants. Yet, a
proven system of financial management within an organization
serves to protect against an atmosphere of carelessness and
imprecision that can open the door to temptation.
In addition to a sound financial system, the question of
efficiency needs attention. What should be avoided are limited
conceptions of efficiency, for instance, those that consider
only the relation of output to material input, even when the
latter includes some quantitative measure of effort. A more
sophisticated understanding of efficiency seems to be required.
With regard to input, for example, work that is motivated
by a spirit of service and an inner urge to excel clearly has a
different value than work that is used as a vehicle to advance
one’s personal interests. As to results, to give another example,
the accomplishment of a particular task—say, the construction
of a small facility for a school—may be far less important than
the development of the participants’ capacity to cooperate and
engage in unified action.
There is also a wealth of spiritual and intellectual resources
upon which endeavors can draw, whatever the material
resources available. A number of these are mentioned in the
Bahá’í writings, such as “unrelaxing resolve and harmonious
cooperation,” “energy, loyalty and resourcefulness,” “determination,” “spirit of absolute consecration,” “organizing
ability,” “zeal,” “tenacity, sagacity and fidelity,” “single-minded
devotion,” “absolute dedication,” “perseverance,” “vigor,”
“courage,” “audacity,” “consistency,” “tenacity of purpose,”
“tenacity of resolution,” and “unrelaxing vigilance.” What the
Bahá’í community has so far achieved in the work of expansion
and consolidation with limited material means is a testimony
348

Supplementary Material
to the efficacy of these spiritual resources, which should be
increasingly extended to the sphere of social action.
Those involved in social action also need to be constantly
aware of the solemn responsibility for the money that has been
placed at their disposal. In this connection, it is helpful to keep
in mind the attitude Bahá’ís evince in relation to the sacred
funds of the Faith—contributions are offered liberally, joyfully,
and sacrificially, and institutions observe prudence and a high
degree of economy in the expenditure of that money.

59.63

V. GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Social action, it has been suggested in this paper, is to be
carried out in the context of a much larger enterprise—namely,
the advancement of a civilization that ensures the material and
spiritual prosperity of the entire human race. The fundamental
teachings of the Faith that will inspire this civilization, some
of which have been mentioned in these pages, need to find expression in the sphere of social action. Clearly, the application
of the requisite principles to the social and material progress of
communities involves a vast process of learning.
In general, a challenge for any instance of social action is to
ensure consistency—among the explicit and implicit convictions
which underpin an initiative, the values promoted by it, the
attitudes adopted by its participants, the methods they employ,
and the ends they seek. Achieving consistency between belief
and practice is no small task: a deep-seated recognition of the
oneness of humanity should prevent all efforts from fostering
disunity, isolation, separateness or competition; an unshakable
conviction in the nobility of human beings, capable of subduing
their lower passions and evincing heavenly qualities, should
serve to protect against prejudice and paternalism, both of
which violate the dignity of people; an immutable belief in
justice should guide an endeavor to allocate resources according
to the real needs and aspirations of the community rather than
the whims and wishes of a privileged few; the principle of the
equality of women and men should open the way not only for
women to assume their role as protagonists of development and
benefit from its fruits but also for the experience of that half
of the world’s population to be given more and more emphasis
in development thought. These few examples illustrate how
closely spiritual principles are to guide development practice.

349

59.64

59.65

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
59.66

If contradictions are to be avoided, the participants in an
endeavor need to become increasingly aware of the environment within which their work advances. On the one hand,
they are to freely draw insights from the range of philosophies,
academic theories, community programs and social movements
within that environment and to keep current with the technological trends that influence progress. On the other hand, they
should remain watchful lest they allow the teachings to be bent
into conformity with this or that ideology, intellectual fad or
fashionable practice. In this connection, the capacity to measure
the value of prevalent approaches, ideas, attitudes, and methods
in the balance of the Faith is vital. This capacity enables one, for
example, to uncover the aggrandizement of self so often lying
behind initiatives that are nominally concerned with empowerment, to discern the tendency of certain development efforts
to foist upon the poor an entirely materialistic worldview, to
perceive the subtle ways in which competitiveness and greed
can be promoted in the name of justice and prosperity, and
ultimately to abandon the notion that one or another theory or
movement which may fleetingly acquire some prominence in
the wider society can provide a shortcut to meaningful change.
The following passage written by the Universal House of Justice
provides guidance in this connection:

59.67

Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation is vast. It calls for profound
change not only at the level of the individual but also in the
structure of society. “Is not the object of every Revelation,”
He Himself proclaims, “to effect a transformation in the
whole character of mankind, a transformation that shall
manifest itself, both outwardly and inwardly, that shall
affect both its inner life and external conditions?” The work
advancing in every corner of the globe today represents the
latest stage of the ongoing Bahá’í endeavor to create the nucleus of the glorious civilization enshrined in His teachings,
the building of which is an enterprise of infinite complexity
and scale, one that will demand centuries of exertion by
humanity to bring to fruition. There are no shortcuts, no
formulas. Only as effort is made to draw on insights from
His Revelation, to tap into the accumulating knowledge of
the human race, to apply His teachings intelligently to the
life of humanity, and to consult on the questions that arise
will the necessary learning occur and capacity be developed.

350

60
Insights from the Frontiers of Learning
A document prepared by
The International Teaching Centre
Bahá’í World Centre
April 2013
When the Universal House of Justice at the start of this Five
Year Plan called on the Bahá’í world to build on the extraordinary achievements of the previous five years, it described a
community that had not only surpassed its numerical goals but
had also achieved qualitative progress at the more profound
level of culture. Since then, the friends have extended their efforts to an increasing number of clusters, embracing ever-larger
contingents of participants in a process of community building.
At the close of the Plan’s second year, there is already a rich experience that has significant implications for future action. The
purpose of the present document is to review this experience
and describe a number of approaches that, when applied by the
friends in a manner suited to their circumstances, may enable
them to accelerate the progress under way. For this review the
clusters at the frontiers of learning worldwide will first be considered, then those where the friends are beginning to establish
programs of growth, and finally those where efforts are being
made to increase intensity. A few words will also be said about
administrative arrangements at the regional or national level
that support the movement of clusters.

60.1

1. CLUSTERS AT THE FRONTIERS OF LEARNING
Today, in more than 3,600 clusters around the globe,
the friends are striving to establish new programs of growth
or to advance existing ones. An analysis of developments in
some 200 of the most advanced of these clusters—particularly
the strongest 20—suggests effective strategies for growth
and demonstrates the efficacy of pursuing lines of action
in a coherent manner. The House of Justice has stated this
351

60.2

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

60.3

60.4

Rid.ván that many of the “distinctive and salient features which
characterize the clusters furthest advanced are also evident in
communities at much earlier points in their development.”1 It
is hoped, therefore, that a close examination of the pattern of
action characteristic of the clusters at the forefront of learning
will assist friends laboring in clusters at even the earliest stages
of development.
Advanced clusters generally have a sizable Bahá’í community and, more significantly, have been effective over time in
mobilizing large numbers of individuals in service to the Cause
and to society. Some have historically had large communities;
others have experienced significant growth only in recent
years. Yet, in all of the strongest clusters, those sustaining the
various activities of the Plan are counted in the hundreds,
while participants may number in the thousands. From among
these dedicated friends, some, thoroughly conversant with
the processes shaping the cluster, attend to the administrative
needs of the Plan as cluster coordinators, members of Area
Teaching Committees, members of Local Spiritual Assemblies,
or assistants to Auxiliary Board members. A growing number
serve as teachers of children’s classes, animators of junior
youth groups, or tutors of study circles, and participate in
cluster-wide teaching campaigns. Many also lend their talents
to a host of other activities in the teaching and administrative
fields and to the enrichment of various aspects of community
life. Everyone is aware that participation in the Nineteen Day
Feast and observance of the Holy Days are obligations not to
be forgotten, and everyone recognizes the importance of devotional gatherings and the quality of the devotional life of the
community. A welcome addition to this efficient use of human
resources is the focused attention being given by a nucleus of
dedicated friends, usually youth, to intensive efforts in a rising
number of neighborhoods and villages.
Among the distinguishing characteristics of these advanced
clusters, as the following pages will explain, is the ability of
the friends to sustain growth in regular three-month cycles,
to maintain focus on the educational process that propels
progress, to establish a strong community-building effort, to
organize their endeavors to meet the challenge of increasing
complexity, and to guide a growing involvement with the wider
society.

352

Supplementary Material

1.1 A Sustained Rhythm of Expansion and Consolidation
The House of Justice has explained that the pattern of
action unfolding in clusters that creates a vibrant community
life may be viewed from two, equally valid perspectives. One
of these involves “the three-month cycles of activity through
which a community grows—the burst of expansion experienced
as a result of intense action; the necessary period of consolidation during which increases in ranks are fortified ... ; and the
opportunities designated for all to reflect and plan.”2
When sustained over time, these three-month cycles of activity set a particular rhythm to community life. Each cycle the
friends regularly renew their vision, assess their progress and
current challenges, adjust their plans of action, and organize
intensive phases of activity for expansion and consolidation.
These cycles unfold uninterruptedly, even though patterns of
expansion may vary. Occasional problems retard progress, but
the believers are able to surmount obstacles and move on in
unified action.
With a deep appreciation of the imperative of direct teaching when circumstances call for it, the friends in strong clusters
have moved beyond a single approach to the expansion phase
of their cycles. They have overcome a preoccupation to try to
increase in numbers in a relatively short period of time. Their
understanding of the framework for action having become
deeper, their analysis of the complex array of circumstances and
forces more sophisticated, and their reflection on their accomplishments and the challenges ahead more penetrating, they are
able to make sound strategic choices in order to respond to the
requirements of growth at a given moment.
“The friends have also learned that it is not necessary for
the principal focus of the expansion phase of every cycle of a
program of growth to be directed towards the same end,”3 the
House of Justice observed at Rid.ván 2013. “Conditions may require that in a given cycle, as an example, attention be primarily
aimed at inviting souls to embrace the Faith through intensive
teaching efforts, undertaken as individuals or collectively; in
another cycle, the focus could be on multiplying a specific core
activity.”4 Similarly, plans for the expansion phase might differ
according to the needs of a particular neighborhood or village.
Indeed, where resources are plentiful, different groups of individuals may be directed towards different, but complementary
objectives in a single expansion phase. In this way, over a span
353

60.5

60.6

60.7

60.8

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

60.9

60.10

of many cycles, there is a steady increase in the number of new
believers, of core activities and participants, and of those who,
when accompanied by others, are able to extend the scope and
complexity of the work of expansion and consolidation.
As the process of learning advances, it is natural that
“when a new feature is introduced it requires special attention
for some time.”5 Yet, the House of Justice adds, “This in no
way diminishes the significance of other aspects of their community-building endeavors.”6 The ability to assign resources
to new elements introduced in successive messages from the
House of Justice, without shifting the attention of all the Plan’s
contributors, allows the friends in the most advanced clusters
to make progress towards “the long-cherished goal of universal
participation in the affairs of the Faith.”7
The result of all these considerations is a three-month period filled with a range of lively, diverse, and well-coordinated
activities. And even though the rate of progress may vary from
place to place depending on the circumstances of various populations, the cycle is characterized by a spirit of unity and a sense
of common purpose among the friends throughout the entire
cluster. What is important to realize is that such a promising
pattern of growth can only be maintained if everyone, in a
humble posture of learning, and no matter the extent of his or
her activity, offers unqualified support, in deeds and words, to
every other soul who labors in the divine vineyard. “All must
become as wings to bear one another onward,”8 Bahá’u’lláh
states.

1.2 Emergence of a Well-Grounded Educational Process
60.11

The second perspective from which the pattern of action
in a cluster can be viewed is as an educational process with
three distinct stages, “the first for the youngest members of
the community, the second for those in the challenging transitional years, and the third for youth and adults.”9 The most
advanced clusters demonstrate both the magnitude that such
an endeavor can assume and the complexity it entails. In the
Lubumbashi cluster of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for example, the educational process now serves about 6,000
people, including some 3,500 children, 2,200 junior youth, and
hundreds of youth and adults in study circles, all supported by
an intricate scheme that generates and systematizes knowledge

354

Supplementary Material
and coordinates the efforts of scores of tutors, animators, and
children’s class teachers.
In many parts of the world, it is relatively easy to attract
children from the wider society to Bahá’í classes, and parents
readily recognize the beneficial influence of spiritual and moral
education on the attitudes and behavior of their youngsters.
The challenge now being rigorously addressed by training
institutes in the most advanced clusters is to systematize the
effort and create an enduring system for the spiritual education
of children. The House of Justice observed, “Among the range
of questions now before every training institute one stands out
as particularly pressing: how to mobilize sufficient numbers of
children’s class teachers for successive grades and, by extension,
tutors who can form groups to study the requisite courses.”10
The immensity of the challenge involved in achieving this is
recognized. Not only are courses being held to train teachers
for the first three grades of the program for which materials
currently exist but a network of coordinators and their helpers
is also gradually being established in each cluster to accompany
the teachers, so that they can learn to sustain the classes and
help the children to advance from grade to grade each year. In
India, for example, as soon as the materials for Grades 2 and
3 were released in 2011, the 17 regional institutes organized a
series of training seminars, efforts were intensified to translate
the materials into Hindi and other regional languages, and
regional and cluster coordinators, in consultation with cluster
agencies, identified and trained teachers in the new materials.
Initial results were encouraging, with nearly 3,000 children
moving into Grade 2, and several hundred into Grade 3.
The junior youth spiritual empowerment program has
grown to become an increasingly prominent feature of many
advanced clusters in the world. With the help of a network of
more than 40 clusters designated as sites for the dissemination
of learning about the program guided by the Office of Social
and Economic Development at the Bahá’í World Centre, a
number of practical challenges have been overcome so that the
program can be implemented and sustained. Valuable knowledge has been accumulated that has allowed the friends in the
learning sites and associated clusters to enhance the efficacy of
training and support for animators, to maintain an increasing
number of junior youth groups for the requisite three years, to
obtain the support of parents and officials, and to carry out
355

60.12

60.13

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

60.14

60.15

the program in the context of the overall pattern of cluster
activities. The arrangement for the ongoing dissemination of
learning has made it possible in the advanced clusters to raise
the number of participants to hundreds and in a few cases to
more than a thousand. By instilling in the junior youth a keen
sense of purpose, the program has demonstrated a remarkable
capacity to transform young people, increase their commitment
to spiritual and material education, empower them to undertake
social action for the improvement of their communities, resist
the destructive and prejudicial forces within their societies, and
contribute to the construction of a better world.
The two stages of the educational process described
above are only possible, of course, if there is a movement of
individuals through the sequence of courses of the institute,
and the most advanced clusters have sustained a continual flow
of participants over an extended period of time—some for as
many as 20 to 30 cycles. Over the years, various approaches
have contributed to this accomplishment worldwide. To initiate
the institute process, believers were encouraged to participate
in the courses and then, as they engaged others in conversation
about the message of Bahá’u’lláh, they found receptivity among
friends, family members, neighbors, and coworkers, many of
whom readily participated in study circles. Subsequently, the
believers in many clusters learned to reach out to “segments of
the general population with heightened receptivity”11 through
direct teaching efforts involving home visits or campaigns,
resulting in significant numbers of new Bahá’ís. As increasing
attention was given to the youth in these populations, a significant percentage began to enter into study circles. In the most
advanced clusters, the capacity to harness the ready response
of growing numbers of young people by enabling them to move
quickly into the field of action primarily as animators of junior
youth groups, but also as participants in or initiators of other
core activities, is on the rise. The challenge of increasing the
number of tutors who take advantage of this opportunity is
being actively pursued as well.
Experience with youth from receptive populations in
advanced clusters suggests that the expansion of the junior
youth program has the potential to impart a pronounced boost
to all three stages of the educational process. The effort to train
animators of junior youth groups, more and more from among
youth in the larger society, calls for additional study circles or
356

Supplementary Material
institute campaigns. Such campaigns could take the form of an
intensive study of Ruhi Institute Books 1 and 5, leading to the
immediate establishment of several junior youth groups; over
time the majority of animators participate in study circles to
complete the remaining books of the sequence, which enhance
their abilities for service. As awareness is raised among the
families of the junior youth, other members, mostly children
and youth but also a few adults, become involved in the stage
of the educational process appropriate for them. Indeed, many
insights about how to significantly broaden the program to
involve large numbers of participants have been derived from
experience in those clusters supported by learning sites. These
insights have been shared with regional institutes and applied
in a manner that assisted with the implementation of other
core activities. Finally, in those clusters where the friends have
learned to maintain junior youth groups over a number of years
until the completion of the program, many junior youth show
enthusiasm for the courses of the main sequence and, with their
customary zeal and discipline, engage in study and in carrying
out the necessary acts of service. Such a promising outcome,
though yet modest in its extent, suggests that, as they move
through the sequence of courses, these young people could swell
the ranks of children’s class teachers, animators, and tutors in
a cluster. What has been described here is not the only way the
educational process advances. However, time and again, the
junior youth program has proved its effectiveness as a strategy
that merits vigorous pursuit.

1.3 Advances in Community Building
When human resources in a cluster become more abundant,
core activities multiply and participation grows. A dynamic and
complex pattern of action emerges that touches every aspect of
community life. An evident characteristic of the advanced clusters is a change in understanding that moves beyond concern
with the mere multiplication of activities to manifest the deeper
implications of the community-building process. In its Rid.ván
2013 message, the House of Justice states:

60.16

As the experience of the friends has deepened, their
capacity for fostering within a cluster a rich and intricate
pattern of life, embracing hundreds or even thousands of
people, has risen. How pleased we are to note the many

60.17

357

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

60.18

insights the believers are gaining from their endeavors.
They appreciate, for instance, that the Plan’s gradual
unfoldment at the level of the cluster is a dynamic process,
one that is necessarily complex and does not lend itself to
ready simplification. They see how it moves forward as
they increase their ability both to raise up human resources
and to coordinate and organize well the actions of those
who arise. The friends realize that as these capacities are
enhanced, it becomes possible to integrate a wider range
of initiatives….
… Indeed, they recognize the benefit that accrues from
the contribution of each individual to the progress of the
whole, and thus the service rendered by each one, in keeping
with the possibilities created by a person’s circumstances, is
welcomed by all.12

60.19

The mutually reinforcing character of the core activities and
the transformative impact of the institute process become more
evident, and sustainable growth and universal participation
more feasible, in the smaller, intimate settings of villages and
neighborhoods. As the House of Justice explains:

60.20

In essence, this approach centers on the response to
Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings on the part of populations who
are ready for the spiritual transformation His Revelation
fosters. Through participation in the educational process
promoted by the training institute, they are motivated to
reject the torpor and indifference inculcated by the forces
of society and pursue, instead, patterns of action which
prove life altering. Where this approach has advanced for
some years in a neighborhood or village and the friends
have sustained their focus, remarkable results are becoming
gradually but unmistakably evident. Youth are empowered
to take responsibility for the development of those around
them younger than themselves. Older generations welcome
the contribution of the youth to meaningful discussions
about the affairs of the whole community. For young and
old alike, the discipline cultivated through the community’s
educational process builds capacity for consultation, and
new spaces emerge for purposeful conversation. Yet change
is not confined merely to the Bahá’ís and those who are
involved in the core activities called for by the Plan, who
might reasonably be expected to adopt new ways of
358

Supplementary Material
thinking over time. The very spirit of the place is affected.
A devotional attitude takes shape within a broad sweep
of the population. Expressions of the equality of men
and women become more pronounced. The education of
children, both boys and girls, commands greater attention.
The character of relationships within families—molded
by assumptions centuries old—alters perceptibly. A sense
of duty towards one’s immediate community and physical
environment becomes prevalent. Even the scourge of
prejudice, which casts its baleful shadow on every society,
begins to yield to the compelling force of unity. In short,
the community-building work in which the friends are
engaged influences aspects of culture.13
Of course, not all neighborhoods demonstrate the receptivity necessary to become centers of intense activity, but Bahá’ís,
wherever they live, can reach out to others and establish core
activities, drawing participants from among their acquaintances
wherever they may reside in the cluster. In recognizing the
commonalities between two simultaneous thrusts—one deeper
in concentrated areas and the other more broadly across the
cluster—the friends in the advanced clusters readily appreciate
their engagement in a single collective enterprise of community
building. A unity in diversity of actions emerges, in which every
believer can find a part to play as defined within the Plan’s
framework for action. And even though different individuals
engage in different activities, all share a common purpose and
readily appreciate the contribution made by others as they
gradually embrace larger and larger numbers of participants in
the pattern of their community life.

60.21

1.4 An Effective Organizational Scheme
A cluster advances as more and more capacity for service
is developed in a growing number of individuals, who are
then assisted to initiate a growing number of interdependent
activities that embrace ever-larger numbers of participants. This
capacity-building process must, as time goes on, be complemented by an ever more sophisticated system of coordination
and support. The House of Justice explained: “Sheer numbers
require organizational schemes to take on a higher degree of
complexity.”14 Numerical growth, along with the geographic
spread of activities in neighborhoods and across the cluster,
359

60.22

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

60.23

60.24

has necessitated further development of the basic scheme of
coordination used to initially establish an intensive program of
growth. The experience of the advanced clusters has borne testimony to the words of the House of Justice that “the workings
of this cluster-level system ... has coded within it the capacity
to accommodate higher and higher degrees of complexity, in
terms of structures and processes, relationships and activities.”15
While it is not possible to distill from the diverse nascent
efforts now emerging in advanced clusters worldwide a single
approach for general use, at this point at least three dimensions
are noteworthy.
In the most advanced clusters, because of increasing complexity, it has become necessary to subdivide the cluster into
smaller areas as well as to select neighborhoods or villages for a
focused effort to learn about community building. Large urban
centers under the jurisdiction of one Local Spiritual Assembly
are organized into sectors, while rural and urban clusters with
several Local Assemblies are divided by creating a number of
units. Examples of such units are the five routes of the Norte
del Cauca cluster in Colombia that follow particular bus routes
and three areas of Tiriki West in Kenya that resulted from
grouping the 72 communities into segments of 20 to 25 neighboring villages. With regard to neighborhoods and villages,
deciding what constitutes a small setting has not been easy in all
cases. In the sparsely populated Pemba cluster in Zambia, a few
small villages next to each other were grouped together to form
settings large enough for learning. Conversely, in the Kajang
cluster in Malaysia, the friends started by working in large
municipal areas but gradually identified within them smaller
locations more suited to community-building endeavors.
The designation of multiple units within a cluster allows
for the creation of new patterns of coordination to serve the
friends in smaller areas. The number of individuals involved
in coordination and support depends largely on the growth in
participation in these smaller settings. At a minimum, in the
most advanced clusters a trio of coordinators is appointed, one
for each of the three defined areas of action of the institute. As
various subunits are identified, the more experienced friends
may be asked to serve as additional institute coordinators or
as helpers to coordinators. In some instances it has been found
useful to have a sector teaching or growth committee emerge
in a similar way, with the designation of an individual as a
360

Supplementary Material
sector growth facilitator functioning under the aegis of the Area
Teaching Committee. Even down to the level of neighborhoods
some informal structures are beginning to take shape, such as
a core group that consults, plans, and fosters participation.
Where there are a large number of activities, coordinators
and growth facilitators are often needed to serve full time as
part of a more formal scheme of coordination. In any case,
what is emerging in most clusters in the front ranks is a robust
administrative network involving numbers of coordinators and
helpers assigned to assist them, currently ranging from about 10
overall in clusters such as Toronto, Canada, to as many as 50
or 60 in Lubumbashi and Tiriki West. In Delhi City, India, the
structures in the Harkesh Nagar neighborhood alone involve
26 individuals who support about 200 core activities engaging
nearly 1,200 people.
Another vital and promising development is the increasing
participation of Local Spiritual Assemblies. Aware of the
guidance provided in the 28 December 2010 message from
the House of Justice pertaining to their responsibilities, and
enriched by “each member’s personal involvement in the core
activities,”16 Local Assemblies are periodically examining their
contribution to the overall effort. Representatives of Assemblies
often participate regularly in cluster planning meetings and
share with other members the ways in which their Assembly can
support the cycles of activity. Assemblies are also able to think
about all community members, providing encouragement and
support and ensuring that each finds a meaningful part in the
work of expansion and consolidation.

60.25

1.5 Greater Involvement in the Life of Society
As the friends in advanced clusters interact more closely
with families and form veritable friendships, they have found
themselves drawn further and further into the life of society.
Their efforts, which emerge naturally through conversation and
common concerns, generally consist of “two interconnected,
mutually reinforcing areas of activity”:17 participating in the
prevalent discourses of society and social action. In both cases,
the first steps consist of simple, fairly informal acts; some may
eventually evolve into more complex, ongoing endeavors.
The initial impact made by the friends in their villages
and neighborhoods is often on perceptions and values related
to the spiritual, moral, and material education of children
361

60.26

60.27

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

60.28

60.29

and youth. As the quality of the children’s classes and junior
youth groups has risen, the capacity of the believers to have
meaningful conversations on the subjects of education and the
moral empowerment of young people has also advanced. As a
corollary to this, parents with youngsters participating in the
Bahá’í programs have demonstrated a greater appreciation
of the importance and commitment to the progress of the
academic studies of their children.
Warm friendships and ongoing conversations among
the families in neighborhoods and villages have also led to
greater awareness of local needs. Reflection meetings, junior
youth groups, or neighborhood Nineteen Day Feasts provide
spaces for the community to begin to consider how to apply
the teachings of the Faith “to improve some aspect of the
social or economic life of a population, however modestly.”18
Some efforts have begun on a small scale and are developing
organically, implemented by villagers or neighborhood residents
themselves. In the Tanna cluster, Vanuatu, for example, a group
of junior youth realized that the route across a creek leading to
a major intersection was difficult to traverse, particularly for
the elderly, so they built a simple bridge and a small basic rest
house, where travellers walking long distances could rest or
take refuge during a heavy rain.
Another feature increasingly observed in advanced clusters
is the impact the institute process has had in building the
capacity and raising the participation of women, who now are
often at the forefront of the teaching and administrative work.
Women and girls have gained increased confidence by initiating
core activities and are having a greater voice in community
affairs through participation in reflection meetings and other
gatherings. Parents, impressed by the initiative of their daughters in serving as children’s class teachers, animators of junior
youth groups, or tutors of study circles, have come to understand the importance of providing girls an education equal to
that of boys. And in cultures that have held traditional views
that obstruct the advancement of women, young men as well as
young women are becoming thoughtful protagonists of change.
In the Daga cluster, Papua New Guinea, for example, young
women, normally relegated to household chores and child care,
are not only being elected members of Local Assemblies but
also as Secretary or Chairperson, a development unimaginable
even a few years ago.
362

Supplementary Material
In addition to these grassroots stirrings, in certain clusters
the efforts of the friends are reinforced through social and
economic development activities of Bahá’í-inspired agencies.
For example, in the Katuyola village of the Mwinilunga East
cluster in Zambia, youth participating in the Preparation for
Social Action program offered by the Inshindo Foundation,
together with youngsters from several junior youth groups,
initiated a tree-planting project to address the high levels of
deforestation that had resulted from traditional slash and burn
farming methods. This enterprise grew to engage the people of
the village and is receiving the support of the local chief, civic
authorities, and the forestry department of the government.

2.

60.30

EMERGING PROGRAMS OF GROWTH

In its 28 December message, the Universal House of Justice
states that the first milestone, signifying the emergence of a
program of growth, is marked by an initial flow of human
resources into the field of action:

60.31

That is to say, in whatever combination and however
small in number, devotional gatherings, children’s classes
and junior youth groups are being maintained by those
progressing through the sequence of institute courses
and committed to the vision of individual and collective
transformation they foster.19

60.32

A new program of growth begins as two nascent capacities
develop. First, one or more friends in a cluster must be able to
help individuals study the institute’s sequence of courses and
accompany them as they initiate core activities. Then, these
individuals must be able to attract others to participate in the
core activities. As efforts along these lines have borne fruit in
various parts of the world, the institutions concerned set aside
exaggerated expectations of what must be achieved before a
new program of growth can be said to have emerged.
Currently the friends in some 1,200 clusters are working
to move beyond this first of several milestones in their development, and such efforts must extend to yet another 1,500 to
2,000 clusters in the next three years to achieve the goal of
5,000 set by the House of Justice.

60.33

363

60.34

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

2.1 Establishing a Basis for Building Capacity
60.35

In whatever cluster they reside, whether selected as a goal
to receive systematic attention or not, the friends should feel no
hesitation to initiate their own effort to establish a program of
growth. Even if the work begins modestly with the actions of a
few enthusiastic believers in a single neighborhood or village,
over time, through a sound institute process, an initial spark
can grow into a flame that draws more and more individuals
into a unified endeavor. Beyond such initiatives, a number of
simple but effective strategies have emerged to support local
believers or open virgin areas.

Pioneering
60.36

The House of Justice referred to one of the strategies for
initiating a program of growth in its 23 May 2011 message to
the Bahá’ís of the world.

60.37

In the next five years, the successful prosecution of the Plan
will require the services of several thousand consecrated
souls who, spurred on by their love for the Blessed Beauty,
will forsake their homes to settle in villages, towns, and
cities in order to raise to 5,000 the number of clusters with
programs of growth.20

60.38

Hundreds of believers have already responded to the call to
settle in international and homefront goal clusters and to initiate efforts that give rise to an organic process of growth. In general, many of these have been young people—with experience
as tutors of study circles, animators of junior youth groups, and
teachers of children’s classes—who had learned how to engage
naturally with the wider society in their more advanced home
clusters. A majority arose as short-term pioneers, and because
they often were able to serve full time for one or two years,
progress in growth and community development proceeded at
a rapid pace.

Visiting Teams
60.39

In describing how a program of growth emerges, the House
of Justice stated that “visiting teams may be called upon to
provide impetus to the fledgling set of activities.”21 Where the
institutions found it challenging to raise up pioneers at the
start, or where pioneers and local believers could benefit from
364

Supplementary Material
added support, an individual, sometimes an assistant assigned
by an Auxiliary Board member, or teaching teams composed of
believers who had solid experience and a collaborative attitude
were sent to goal clusters to help firmly establish the institute
process. This support was often reinforced by arranging for
friends from clusters without growth programs to spend time
in a well-developed cluster to increase their understanding
through firsthand experience of how to advance a process of
growth.
In the island cluster of Rodrigues, off the coast of
Mauritius, many attempts were made to settle short-term homefront pioneers, but whenever they eventually left the island, the
growth process invariably stalled. A team of four experienced
animators from the mainland came for three weeks with a plan
to establish junior youth groups and develop resources within
the population. The first week, assisted by two local animators,
they reached out to 20 junior youth and visited the parents
to explain the program. In the second week, they organized a
one-week day camp; 15 junior youth attended consistently. In
the third week, the animators continued to visit the parents to
assess the impact of the program. The younger children asked
to have activities as well. From the group of junior youth now
involved in the program, three will turn 15 soon and hope to
participate in a study circle for Book 1. For their next visit, the
team from Mauritius decided to arrange for the study of Book
5 as well as to assist with the junior youth groups.

60.40

Institutional Support
At the start of the Five Year Plan, national communities
were encouraged to select, after consultation among the various
institutions concerned, a limited number of clusters where they
could begin to learn about initiating new programs of growth.
Many countries, buoyed by their experience and initial success,
already have a process in place to begin work in all the clusters
they hope to advance beyond the first milestone before the end
of this Plan. Others still need to extend their efforts in this area
during the course of the coming year, so that there is sufficient
time for the institute process to take root and begin to flourish
in every goal cluster.
“All of the institutions and agencies promoting the aim of
the current series of global Plans need to exercise the measure
of agility that the birth of such a dynamic process demands”,22
365

60.41

60.42

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

the House of Justice states. Whatever strategy is employed to
achieve this end, institutional support is essential. A homefront
pioneer who settled in the Fianarantsoa cluster of Madagascar
found great receptivity. She began by hosting devotional
meetings and offering a children’s class. She was able to engage
a few parents of the children in a study circle, but for some
time the cluster did not advance further. Assistance from the
training institute made the difference. When the regional coordinator visited, together they were able to stimulate the growth
process by identifying youth who showed interest in serving as
animators of junior youth groups. They made a concerted effort
to meet youth and their families, share the aims of the junior
youth spiritual empowerment program, and enlist their support.
These youth studied the courses of the institute in a nearby
urban center and embraced the Faith. There are now nine junior
youth groups of 100 participants. With the local friends actively
serving, the cluster moved past the first milestone in a span of
only nine months.

2.2 Expanding the Reach of Core Activities
60.43

60.44

In new clusters where efforts to establish programs of
growth have been initiated over the past two years, the friends
have taken advantage of “opportunities afforded by [their]
personal circumstances”23 and engaged in conversation with
people they come in contact with in daily life—neighbors, parents from their children’s school, shopkeepers, young students,
or new acquaintances met in public spaces—about the spiritual
and material conditions of their communities. The stories of
these myriad encounters have confirmed the observation of the
House of Justice that the believers are growing in their capacity
“to enter into purposeful discussion on themes of spiritual
import with people from every walk of life”24 and that any of
the core activities “can serve as a stimulus to growth.”25
A mother in Belarus began a children’s class with her two
children, and the class grew to nine. Young people aged 12
to 14 soon showed interest, and the mother and her husband
participated in intensive courses of the training institute to learn
how to serve as animators of a junior youth group. After this
second core activity got under way, a study circle was added
to respond to the growing interest of the children’s parents. In
a cluster in the United States, a devotional meeting provided
an initial impulse for movement. Gradually a study circle was
366

Supplementary Material
formed with some of the participants from the devotional
gathering. Soon after, a children’s class was started, followed
by a junior youth group. In an emerging cluster in Fiji, the
first step was to reach out to youth and invite them to serve as
animators to form and sustain junior youth groups. To support
the initiative, the Local Spiritual Assembly decided that all its
members would also complete a study of Book 5. The initial
effort attracted the interest and involvement of youth from
the wider society, and as they participated in institute courses,
human resources were developed not only to multiply junior
youth groups but also to establish children’s classes as well.
These experiences, repeated in various ways in many
clusters worldwide, demonstrate how the initial flow of human
resources into the arena of systematic action rapidly propels
a cluster beyond the first milestone along the continuum of
development.

3.

60.45

INCREASING INTENSITY

As the reach of core activities continues to expand, a
higher level of organization to coordinate efforts emerges, and
a distinct rhythm to the cycles of expansion and consolidation
becomes apparent. The enthusiasm of the friends grows, their
facility with the instruments and methods of the Plan increases,
and they become more adept at responding to the unique social
conditions around them. With more activity, they put in place
the institutional structures needed to channel their energies and
deal with added complexity. In time, they advance towards the
second milestone, the establishment of an intensive program of
growth.
While a good deal of effort may be required to move
beyond the first milestone, this is only the beginning of many
challenges to be addressed in striving to continually increase
the intensity of action and sustain the process of growth and
community development. Indeed, in some cases, the friends
have encountered misunderstandings or obstacles that have
sapped their energies or led to a reduction in the scope of their
endeavors for some time. With experience they have come to
realize that overcoming challenges is an intrinsic part of their
journey.
Thus, in striving to increase intensity so that clusters
advance along the continuum of development, the challenge of
the institutions becomes, on the one hand, how to sustain and
367

60.46

60.47

60.48

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

extend the healthy dynamics of fledgling programs of growth
and, on the other, how to revitalize intensive programs of
growth in clusters where the level of activity and the development of human resources seem to have reached a plateau. In
this regard, a number of insights and approaches have emerged
to assist the friends to “learn to read their own reality, see their
own possibilities, make use of their own resources, and respond
to the exigencies of large-scale expansion and consolidation to
come.”26

3.1 Enhancing the Quality of the Institute Process
60.49

In its Rid.ván 2010 message and in the message dated
12 December 2011, the House of Justice discussed the purpose
and character of the institute process and the importance of
enhancing its quality. Through a deep study of these messages,
the believers and institutions have realized that creating a
systematic and vibrant process of human resource development
continues to be their primary challenge. They recognize that
“in the final analysis, sustained quantitative gains will be
contingent on qualitative progress.”27 Replacing an anxiety
about “numbers”—whether of core activities, participants, or
enrollments—with confidence in the efficacy of the institute
process to empower growing contingents of individuals, the
friends are placing renewed emphasis on the quality of the
educational process at all levels, and especially the quality of
study circles. As the House of Justice wrote at Rid.ván 2010,
“Much will fall on those who serve as tutors.”28 Theirs is the
responsibility to create

60.50

an environment conducive to the spiritual empowerment
of individuals, who will come to see themselves as active
agents of their own learning, as protagonists of a constant
effort to apply knowledge to effect individual and collective
transformation.29

60.51

With the aim of enhancing the capacities of those serving
as tutors, animators, and children’s class teachers, training
institutes around the world have given greater attention to
reinforcing the work of cluster institute coordinators on whom
rests primary responsibility for accompanying them. In the past
two years, special arrangements were made to enable more
coordinators to offer additional time—many on a full-time
basis. Also, gatherings for cluster coordinators that involved
368

Supplementary Material
in-depth study of institute materials and reflection on critical
concepts contained in them, in conjunction with field visits,
were held in many regions and countries. In this way, institute
coordinators increased their ability to support the friends in
conducting study of the materials of the institute in a manner
that fosters understanding and in implementing the practical
components in a way that builds confidence for service. Where
this type of profound reflection was incorporated into the
structure of training institutes and their regular operations,
qualitative progress was observed.

3.2 Providing Greater Structure as Complexity Rises
In clusters that have attained a level of development
where “a nascent program for the sustained expansion and
consolidation of the Faith can be perceived,”30 the need for
administrative structure emerges over time in a natural way and
cannot be rushed to correspond to some preconceived scheme.
Initially the efforts of the friends have generally been guided
and supported by Auxiliary Board members and their assistants. More sophisticated patterns of coordination are required
as the number of participants and the level of activity increase.
If one of the core activities is growing far beyond the level of
the others, it is natural that a coordinator would be put in place
for this line of action first. For example, in those clusters where
focus was initially directed towards increasing the number of
junior youth groups, the junior youth coordinator was the first
to be appointed.
“Parallel to the establishment of mechanisms to support
the institute process,”31 explains the House of Justice, “other
administrative structures are gradually taking shape.”32
The question of the timely appearance of an Area Teaching
Committee depends on the circumstances in a particular cluster.
In clusters that are just beyond the first milestone, although the
number of activities and human resources might be increasing,
the appointment of an individual as a cluster development
facilitator has usually proved to be sufficient to support the
participation of believers and friends of the Faith in home visits,
devotional meetings, and other teaching activities. A nucleus for
an Area Teaching Committee has generally emerged naturally
from among the core of active believers who have demonstrated
a capacity to accompany others in service.

369

60.52

60.53

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
60.54

As with other structures in the cluster, the means for planning and reflection has also developed organically, becoming
more organized, systematic, and varied as complexity has
grown. Initial informal interactions, perhaps facilitated by an
Auxiliary Board member or an assistant, eventually give rise to
a cluster reflection meeting and to other formal and informal
occasions for reflection, such as gatherings for coordinators,
tutors, animators, or children’s class teachers; teaching teams;
or for the participants working in specific cluster sectors,
neighborhoods, or villages.

3.3 Intensifying Community-Building Efforts
in Neighborhoods and Villages
60.55

60.56

In most clusters, there are a number of Bahá’í communities.
Community-building efforts will therefore naturally emerge in
all these localities. Participants in core activities are drawn from
a wide circle of contacts and possibly from various parts of a
cluster. Where the number of believers is few, a special measure
of flexibility may be required and friends who live in nearby
communities may need to collaborate in their endeavors. In
sizable communities, gatherings in a local center provide an
opportunity to host large numbers and demonstrate the distinctive spirit of the Faith, reinforcing the work in smaller settings.
Efforts to engage circles of friends in the core activities—university students or young mothers, to mention but two—make
a valuable contribution to the overall community-building
process under way. As the friends strive to creatively explore
the possibilities around them in more and more parts of the
cluster, new believers are welcomed, human resources raised
up, and the pattern of community life that germinates through
the core activities is gradually extended until it embraces all the
believers and their associates. Essential as these efforts are, they
eventually reach their own natural pace and scale, and alone,
seem insufficient to achieve the thrust required for large-scale
expansion and consolidation.
As discussed in section 1.3, particularly promising developments occur when, as the House of Justice explains, some
of the friends, often young believers, “become integrated into
neighborhoods and dedicate themselves to assisting particularly
receptive populations to advance along a path of spiritual
development—giving rise to centers of intense activity.”33 This
type of endeavor, a distinguishing feature of the most advanced
370

Supplementary Material
clusters, offers great promise as well for all clusters where
the friends seek to build intensity. In some cases, work in the
neighborhoods or villages is initiated as a result of organized,
direct teaching activities or a campaign to expand a particular
core activity; in others, individuals settle as pioneers for this
purpose; and in some, cluster agencies accompany resident
believers to further intensify their teaching efforts among their
neighbors. In clusters where, from the outset, the junior youth
program is singled out as a critical element in advancing the
community-building process, agencies identify neighborhoods
with a large number of youth and junior youth. In selecting
neighborhoods or villages for focused efforts, it has been
observed that fostering activity in too many areas at once
can dissipate energies. These varied experiences suggest the
importance of the friends’ taking an in-depth view of a particular neighborhood or village to understand its reality—its
resources, its challenges, and the potential of its population
to work alongside the Bahá’ís to “begin a process of collective
transformation.”34
When a dedicated team of believers focuses its attention
on fostering activity in a neighborhood or village, these friends
need to be given latitude to function in a manner that is in harmony with an unfolding organic process and be provided with
appropriate support from institutions. They need time to learn
how to respond to the demands of growth within a receptive
population: how to form genuine friendships, what teaching
activities are effective, and how to channel resources to sustain
such a growth process. It is not necessary, or even productive,
for everyone in the cluster to focus on the neighborhood. Yet,
often it has been found that progress in a neighborhood or
village can infuse a new energy and optimism in endeavors
across the rest of the cluster, providing a fresh impulse to its
forward movement and to the process of community building
under way in all areas.
As multiple activities are concentrated in the small,
relatively cohesive areas of a neighborhood or village, the
transformative impact of the spiritual and social forces at work
are more readily noticed by the population at large. Parents
see their children and youth progressing before their eyes and
recognize that the social relations of their community have been
imbued with a new spirit. Entire families are sometimes drawn
to participate in the life of the Bahá’í community and embrace
371

60.57

60.58

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

its teachings. And efforts are eventually “sustained by human
resources indigenous to the neighborhood or village itself—by
men and women eager to improve material and spiritual conditions in their surroundings.”35

3.4 Identifying and Overcoming Obstacles
to Sustained Progress
60.59

60.60

60.61

In hundreds of advanced clusters where intensive programs
of growth were begun in the previous Plan, the believers
achieved steady progress, enabling them to move beyond the
second milestone towards the frontiers of learning. However,
in hundreds of others, the friends encountered obstacles that
significantly hindered their continued advance or even resulted
in a decrease in participation and activity, requiring them
to reflect upon and revise their approach in order to learn
to overcome the difficulty. A review of some challenges and
misconceptions that arose in such clusters may assist those
who face similar problems to properly assess their situation and
make the necessary adjustments in a timely manner.
In some cases, challenges arose as a result of an inability
to establish one or another vital aspect of the framework for
action. For example, in certain clusters the institute process had
not taken root so the relationship between study and service
intrinsic to the institute courses was not realized. Thus, rather
than bringing about an organic process in which more and more
individuals carry out more and more activities, a small number
of believers became overwhelmed by increasing responsibilities.
Only when the challenge of human resource development was
resolved could the scope of endeavors expand. In other clusters,
the friends readily enrolled new believers but struggled to help
a significant number of them advance through the sequence
of courses and enter a path of service. There were also those
instances when the friends initiated many core activities among
themselves, without giving due attention to teaching and inviting participants from the wider community. Reflection meetings
sometimes centered too much on planning or instruction rather
than the opportunity to learn from experience and revise action
accordingly.
Occasionally, when addressing new, emerging facets of
an evolving program of growth, misunderstandings surfaced,
or, in some cases, attention to a new aspect of the work
led, inadvertently, to ignoring others. For example, in some
372

Supplementary Material
places a dichotomy was perceived between collective teaching
campaigns and the responsibility for personal teaching, when
in reality, every act of teaching represents a response of the
community to the Master’s Divine Plan. Sometimes, a focus
on neighborhoods was interpreted to mean that core activities
drawing participants from different parts of a cluster should no
longer be maintained. On occasion, there was a “tendency to
confuse focus with uniformity or exclusivity,”36 leading either
to an insistence on a single fixed approach or, conversely, to the
idea that all individuals can establish any initiative they wish.
In the work of expansion and consolidation, the House of
Justice has repeatedly observed that mistakes will inevitably be
made and new challenges will present themselves. Obstacles,
when they arise, are ultimately resolved through perseverance
and further experience. Fruitless debate, insistence on personal
views, creating false dichotomies, or the “tendency to reduce
a complex process of transformation into simplistic steps,
susceptible to instruction”37 can be carefully avoided or wisely
overcome. It is learning together that is yielding the insights
necessary so that “stumbling blocks can be made stepping
stones for progress.”38

60.62

3.5 Reaching Out to Youth in Receptive Populations
As discussed in section 1.2, the experience generated in
many of the most advanced clusters has demonstrated the
efficacy of a strategy that involves focused attention on enlisting
young people from the wider society to serve in the community-building process. The same approach has been effective in
establishing or strengthening intensive programs of growth.
As stated in a letter written on behalf of the House of Justice:

60.63

By multiplying vibrant junior youth groups, a community
learns a great deal about, for instance, how capable human
resources are increased and deployed; how capacity for
service is raised within cohorts of individuals; how an
expanding program can be effectively coordinated; and
how initiating one activity can, quite naturally, lead to the
emergence of others. And as a consequence of the organic
unfoldment of the educational process and the participants’
ongoing spiritual and moral development, all facets of the
growth program are, in time, extended and enhanced.39

60.64

373

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
60.65

60.66

In the Tuscany North-West cluster of Italy, the level of
activity had reached a plateau and the veteran believers found it
challenging to reach out to receptive youth. With the aid of the
junior youth coordinator and teaching committee, a campaign
focused on expanding the junior youth program in neighborhoods in the city of Livorno where the believers were interacting
with a receptive population. Ten youths from around Italy spent
three weeks in Livorno praying, studying, and preparing how
to converse about the junior youth program. As a result of the
campaign, 12 young people from the wider society participated
in a two-week intensive training in Books 1 and 5 to prepare
to serve as animators. The experience of focusing on this
particular age group in a receptive neighborhood changed the
outlook of a community that had been struggling to increase
participation in core activities. As two adult believers wrote,
“We all feel that Livorno is no longer as before. There is a
new awareness in the community, a new energy, a new vision.”
Almost every member of the local community is now engaged
in the activities of the Plan, including some serving on a new
Area Teaching Committee, others offering devotions in their
homes for the new believers and seekers, and nearly all striving
to reach out to youth. Similar experiences have emerged in all
continents.
Not all the believers, of course, are able to work directly
with junior youth groups, which may be largely concentrated in
certain neighborhoods or villages in their cluster. Nevertheless,
a sound knowledge of the program has proved to be invaluable
for all those engaged in the work of the Plan, since the insights
acquired help to shape the discourse with the wider community
about the mission of the Faith to contribute to the betterment
of the world. In the East Valley cluster in the United States, the
friends serving in teaching teams and as animators concentrated
for a period on learning how to effectively engage young people
and their families from a receptive neighborhood in an elevated
and effective conversation about the junior youth program.
Over time, as their efforts bore fruit, this conversation began
to spread to all the friends engaged in activities throughout
the cluster, whether associated with the junior youth groups or
not. This not only contributed to the multiplication of groups
but also enriched the entire program of growth by helping the
friends visualize and describe their efforts in broader terms of
community building and social transformation.
374

Supplementary Material

3.6 Enduring Fellowship
The “ethos of loving service” 40 fostered through the
institute process becomes the animating spirit in clusters where
encouragement and helpfulness are expressed through a deep
commitment to accompanying one another in treading a path
of service. This vital element in the emerging Bahá’í culture is
manifested through the quality of the interactions among the
friends. By working shoulder to shoulder, sharing in one another’s joys and struggles, bonds of love and friendship are created
that are the foundation for enduring fellowship. No structures
or processes can make up for the spirit of loving fellowship if
it does not exist.
Where faith in the capacity of others, a humble attitude
of learning, mutual support and assistance, patience and forbearance, flexibility and generosity, and loving fellowship and
encouragement are found, all the elements of the framework
for action cohere and progress. As described by the House of
Justice: “The operation of spiritual forces in the arena of service
becomes increasingly apparent, and bonds of friendship, so vital
to a healthy pattern of growth, are continuously reinforced.”41

60.67

60.68

4. ENHANCING INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY TO
SUPPORT THE MOVEMENT OF CLUSTERS

The previous discussion in sections 1.4 and 3.2 concerning
administrative arrangements highlighted how structures within
clusters evolve in response to growth and an expanding framework of activity, accommodating ever greater complexity. This
section will consider structures and processes at regional and
national levels, where institutions are striving “to create and
refine mechanisms that serve to further the pattern of growth
unfolding at the cluster level and the learning process associated
with it.”42
It should be noted that, despite significant evolution in the
scheme of coordination in the first two years of the current
Plan, it is premature to define a specific pattern to be followed
everywhere as clusters move towards the frontiers of learning.
More experience is required, and additional guidance must
be provided over time by the Universal House of Justice.
Nevertheless, it is hoped that the insights about administrative
structures and processes offered in this section of the document,
although preliminary in nature, will assist institutions in
375

60.69

60.70

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

various countries and regions to keep pace with the complexity
associated with the movement of increasing numbers of clusters
along the continuum of development.

4.1 Training Institutes
60.71

60.72

60.73

There are some 300 training institutes worldwide, about
a third of which operate at the regional level. Some of these
agencies have already grown to become sizable and complex
organizations, with scores of full- and part-time coordinators
and their helpers maintaining hundreds of activities involving
thousands of participants. For many years, most of the work
of the institute, including overseeing both administrative
matters and the development of the programs, fell on national
or regional coordinators. While the responsibilities of these
coordinators continue to be important, and indeed have only
become more complex as the scope of the activity of institutes
has been extended to thousands of additional clusters, it
has been necessary to bring institute boards more fully into
operation as well.
National Assemblies or Regional Councils, in consultation
with Counsellors, appoint to institute boards individuals who
have had direct involvement in serving as tutors, animators,
children’s class teachers, or former coordinators and are
familiar with the institute’s structure. A sound understanding
of the relationship between human resource development and
sustained growth is also required. With such a reservoir of
experience, boards are increasingly taking responsibility for
formulating annual plans and budgets, organizing periodic
reflection gatherings with coordinators, facilitating the flow
of funds, and collaborating with other institutions. The board
also needs to regularly engage with the Counsellors and their
auxiliaries and have a close, collaborative relationship with the
Regional Council or, in its absence, with the National Assembly
itself, through frequent communication and occasional joint
meetings.
A primary consideration of the board and all the institutions that support the institute is the scheme of coordination
and how the coordinators at all levels can be accompanied in
their service. National and regional coordinators support a
growing number of cluster coordinators by periodically bringing them together in gatherings for sharing experience and by
visiting them in the field to support their day-to-day operations.
376

Supplementary Material
They also ensure that resources such as funds and materials
reach clusters in a timely manner, and cluster coordinators
are engaged in a collaborative interaction with other agencies
and institutions. Where activity is under way in a significant
number of clusters, it may even be necessary to provide for
the organization of the work of coordinators into subregions.
Whatever the particular structure suited to the conditions of a
region, there must be a variety of occasions that bring together
friends serving as coordinators to learn from one another’s
experience, explore new guidance, and reflect upon and revise
their plans of action.
A number of attitudes and abilities are essential to foster in
coordinators at all levels: deep understanding and appreciation
of the nature, purpose, and methods of the training institute;
commitment to the community-building process; recognition of
the need to nurture the potential of others; dedication to learning; a collaborative spirit; and a readiness to support others
and be supported by them in adhering to a Bahá’í way of life.
Experience in recent years clearly indicates that coordinators
will need to be allowed to serve for a few years in order for the
required capacity to be built, and creative means will have to
be developed to enable them to devote a period of their lives
to this field of endeavor, perhaps, in the case of the youth, in
conjunction with their continuing education.

60.74

4.2 Learning Sites for the Junior Youth
Spiritual Empowerment Program
As described earlier, the systematic process for learning
about the junior youth spiritual empowerment program has
lent impetus to growth and community building in general.
A formal structure for this learning process emerged during
the previous Five Year Plan when a number of clusters with
significant advances in the implementation of the junior youth
program were designated as sites for the dissemination of
learning. Now numbering more than forty, at different stages
of development, these learning sites and the resource persons
associated with them support a network of approximately ten
clusters each. Among these nearly 400 clusters are virtually all
of the most advanced clusters in the world. Now a critical component of the institutional framework to advance community
building, this structure for systematic learning is proving to be
an invaluable resource for Counsellors and their auxiliaries,
377

60.75

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

National Assemblies, Regional Councils, and training institutes.
The House of Justice explained:
60.76

The areas of learning at these sites, and in their associated clusters, have included the capacity of animators,
the dynamics of junior youth groups, and the scheme
of coordination that supports the development of the
program among diverse populations; this learning is then
shared with the training institutes. The effectiveness of the
­program is vastly enhanced as resource persons serving the
learning sites conduct training seminars and work closely
with cluster coordinators in their efforts to increase the
number of animators and junior youth groups.43

4.3 Regional Bahá’í Councils
60.77

60.78

Bearing the primary responsibility at this time “for overseeing the execution of the Five Year Plan in the territories under
their jurisdiction,”44 Regional Councils recognize that their
overarching task is to ensure the movement of clusters along a
rich and dynamic continuum of development, from supporting
those where the first stirrings of the growth process are evident
to strengthening those that are advancing the frontiers of
learning. This is achieved through the Councils’ assistance to
the institutions, agencies, and believers at the cluster level, in
addition to their work with the training institute.
As part of their responsibility, Regional Councils ensure
“the timely appearance and dynamic functioning of Area
Teaching Committees.”45 During the last Five Year Plan,
Councils gained a great deal of experience in fostering the
effective functioning of Area Teaching Committees through
gatherings for orientation, consultation, and planning, as well
as visits by the Council Secretary or other friends designated
to follow the work of the Committees and the progress of
clusters. In addition to assessing the strengths and challenges
in each cluster, the objective of these interactions was to
focus on building capacity in the Committees, particularly in
their secretaries. Another fruitful practice has been a periodic
meeting for reflection by key individuals at the regional level,
once every three or six months, to assess how the Area Teaching
Committees are being supported and how they are contributing
to the development of the clusters. Such meetings have included
the Secretary of the Council, the Counsellor or Auxiliary Board
378

Supplementary Material
members, regional institute coordinators, and other members
of the Council or staff charged with following the movement
of clusters.
Along with their responsibilities in the field, Regional
Councils are carrying out an array of administrative duties.
They are trying to put into place efficient systems and mechanisms to ensure the flow of funds, information, learning, and
human resources, such as pioneers. The scope of the work of
Council Secretaries, which includes overseeing administrative
and field operations and, in some cases, properties, is increasing,
requiring many to devote hours equivalent to full-time service.
In order to manage the wide range of tasks, well-functioning
offices with support staff are emerging.

60.79

5. SOCIETY-BUILDING POWER OF THE FAITH
Over many decades, generations of Bahá’ís have striven
to apply the teachings of Bahá’u’lláh to their individual and
collective lives. Inspired always by the distant vision of a
new World Order and a divine civilization, the believers have
pressed on and consecrated themselves to achieving the goals
of successive global Plans. This vision of a world civilization,
as Shoghi Effendi wrote, is one that “no mortal eye hath ever
beheld or human mind conceived.”46 Referring to the endeavor
of the followers of Bahá’u’lláh, who at the time were few in
number, he stated:

60.80

Conscious of their high calling, confident in the
society-building power which their Faith possesses, they
press forward, undeterred and undismayed, in their efforts
to fashion and perfect the necessary instruments wherein
the embryonic World Order of Bahá’u’lláh can mature and
develop.47

60.81

The transformative and constructive powers inherent in
the Faith are gradually becoming manifest in advanced clusters
where Bahá’ís are working alongside their neighbors in a
collective process and, through social action and participation
in countless conversations, are learning to respond to the
heightened social consciousness that springs in a natural way
from intensive engagement in the core activities. The House of
Justice has observed:

60.82

An especially notable feature of the last twelve months
has been the frequency with which the Bahá’í community is

60.83

379

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

being identified, in a wide variety of contexts, with efforts
to bring about the betterment of society in collaboration
with like-minded people. From the international arena to
the grass roots of village life, leaders of thought in all kinds
of settings have expressed their awareness that not only do
Bahá’ís have the welfare of humanity at heart, but they possess a cogent conception of what needs to be accomplished
and effective means for realizing their aspirations.48
60.84

The Bahá’í community is now more able than ever before
to advance “the manifold and diverse dimensions of civilization
building.”49 In contemplating the complexity of the process and
the recurring challenges that lie ahead, there is no doubt that
“endeavor, ceaseless endeavor, is required,”50 as the Master
described the task of establishing “true civilization.”51 At the
same time, mindful of the countless expressions of Bahá’u’lláh’s
divine love and evidences of His all-conquering power in their
lives, the friends press forward, laboring “serenely, confidently,
and unremittingly”52 to contribute their talents and energies, no
matter where they reside, to those efforts that are “conducive to
the regeneration of the world and the salvation of the peoples
and kindreds of the earth.”53

380

Supplementary Material
REFERENCES
1 Rid.ván 2013 message written by the Universal
House of Justice to the Bahá’ís of the world.
2 Message dated 12 December 2011 written by the Universal
House of Justice to all National Spiritual Assemblies.
3 Rid.ván 2013 message.
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Rid.ván 2010 message written by the Universal House of Justice
to the Bahá’ís of the world.
8 From an unpublished Tablet of Bahá’u’lláh.
9 Message dated 12 December 2011.
10 Ibid.
11 Message dated 27 December 2005 written by the Universal
House of Justice to the Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors.
12 Rid.ván 2013 message.
13 Ibid.
14 Message dated 28 December 2010 written by the Universal
House of Justice to the Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors.
15 Rid.ván 2010 message.
16 Message dated 28 December 2010.
17 Rid.ván 2010 message.
18 Ibid.
19 Message dated 28 December 2010.
20 Message dated 23 May 2011 written by the Universal House of
Justice to the Bahá’ís of the world.
21 Message dated 28 December 2010.
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid.
24 Rid.ván 2010 message.
25 Message dated 28 December 2010.
26 Ibid.
27 Rid.ván 2010 message.
28 Ibid.
29 Ibid.
30 Message dated 28 December 2010.
31 Ibid.
32 Ibid.
33 Letter dated 9 August 2012 written on behalf of the Universal
House of Justice to the National Spiritual Assembly of the
United States.
34 Rid.ván 2010 message.

381

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

Ibid.
Message dated 27 December 2005.
Message dated 28 December 2010.
Ibid.
Letter dated 14 November 2012 written on behalf of the
Universal House of Justice to the National Spiritual Assembly of
the United States.
Message dated 28 December 2010.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Letter dated 7 August 2012 written on behalf of the Universal
House of Justice to the National Spiritual Assembly of Germany.
Letter dated 23 January 2011 written on behalf of the Universal
House of Justice to the Local Spiritual Assemblies of Colombes
and Courbevoie, France.
Letter dated 9 August 2012 written on behalf of the Universal
House of Justice to the National Spiritual Assembly of the
United States.
Shoghi Effendi, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh: Selected
Letters (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1991, 2009 printing),
p. 206.
Ibid., p. 195.
Rid.ván 2013 message.
Rid.ván 2010 message.
‘Abdu’l-Bahá, The Secret of Divine Civilization (Wilmette:
Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1990, 1999 printing), p. 66.
Ibid., p. 81.
Rid.ván 153 [1996] message written by the Universal House of
Justice to the Bahá’ís of the world.
Bahá’u’lláh, Tablets of Bahá’u’lláh Revealed After the Kitáb-iAqdas, (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1988, 1992 printing),
p. 223.

382

61
Training Institutes:
Attaining a Higher Level of Functioning
A document prepared by
The International Teaching Centre
Bahá’í World Centre
January 2017
In its message dated 29 December 2015 to the Conference
of the Continental Boards of Counsellors, the Universal House
of Justice stated that attaining a higher level of functioning is a
pressing concern of training institutes. This concern comes into
sharp focus when viewed in the context of the goals before the
Bahá’í world during this Five Year Plan: to “seek to raise the
number of clusters where a program of growth has become
intensive to 5,000 by Rid.ván 2021”1 and to add “several hundred more”2 to some two hundred clusters that have already
advanced beyond the third milestone. As stated by the House
of Justice:

61.1

The community’s efforts to fortify programs of growth in
thousands of clusters and sustain their intensification will
place heavy demands on these agencies. Their focus, of
course, is the unfoldment of the three stages of the educational process they oversee and the strengthening of the
process of learning associated with each, so that both the
quality of the institute’s activities and the capacity to extend
them to ever-growing numbers are constantly rising.3

61.2

In the institutional meetings held across the world to prepare for the beginning of the current Five Year Plan, the friends
benefited from viewing what was happening in each cluster
from two perspectives. The first, engaging in three-monthly
cycles of activity through which the community grows, with
attention to teaching the Faith and conversation with those
from the wider society, and, the second, the unfoldment of
the three educational imperatives overseen by the training

61.3

383

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

institute. Regarding the latter, the House of Justice has stated
the following:
61.4

In this context, one speaks of three educational imperatives,
each distinguished by its own methods and materials, each
claiming a share of resources, and each served by mechanisms to systematize experience and to generate knowledge
based on insights gained in the field. Quite naturally, then,
three discussions take shape around the implementation
of the program for the spiritual education of children, the
junior youth spiritual empowerment program, and the main
sequence of courses.4

61.5

To help the friends managing the operations of training
institutes to respond to current exigencies, this document shares
some insights from the body of experience that has accrued
in the Bahá’í world about implementing the main sequence
of courses, the junior youth spiritual empowerment program,
and the program for the spiritual education of children. The
document also addresses matters related to the institutional
capacity of training institutes. It is hoped that in each region
or country the friends responsible for the institute’s endeavors
will, taking their particular circumstances and experience into
consideration, use these insights to further systematize their
efforts.
1.

61.6

THE MAIN SEQUENCE OF COURSES

As is generally understood, the study of institute courses in a
given cluster often starts with only a small group of participants
who then begin to offer one or another of the acts of service
the courses recommend. For the process of growth to advance
meaningfully, the number of people studying institute courses
must continue to rise. The principal issues that lie at the heart
of this objective include raising the number and enhancing the
capacity of those serving as tutors, sustaining a steady flow of
participants through the sequence of courses, and coordinating
the institute’s efforts through effective mechanisms.

1.1 Raising the Number and Enhancing
the Capacity of Tutors
61.7

Fundamental to strengthening the educational programs of
the training institute is a steadily increasing number of capable
tutors who, over time, are assisted to grow in effectiveness.
384

Supplementary Material

1.1.1

The initial cadre of tutors

Institutes face a number of questions with regard to clusters
where a program of growth is nascent, among them: how to
meaningfully extend the reach of the study of institute courses
to each cluster, and how to ensure that “within a reasonable
period, some among those residing in a cluster are enabled to
serve as tutors.”5
Local friends in clusters with new programs of growth
have initially relied on participating in the study of the courses
offered by experienced tutors in more advanced clusters nearby
or farther afield. They have also benefited from the services of
one or two carefully selected and prepared visiting tutors drawn
from the strong clusters who in some instances also serve as
homefront pioneers for a short or long term. In either case, the
tutors involved are most effective when they appreciate that
they are promoting a process with far-reaching implications
for the spiritual and material life of a population. Besides
assisting the first batch of friends to arise and serve, through
the courses they offer the tutors help build a strong foundation
of understanding and experience on which the institute process
is gradually erected.
Yet, it is not until some of the local friends begin serving
as tutors that the institute truly takes root in a cluster and the
number of those studying institute courses increases significantly. The first steps in this regard may be to encourage a few
friends from among those who have studied the early courses
and gained some experience with the related activities to begin
helping others study the courses. Visiting tutors may begin by
calling on these friends to help in leading discussions of sections
of the materials and organizing the related practices. They
might also delve with them deeper into challenging aspects of
the study and practice under way. In this manner, some local
friends are carefully enabled to start offering others at least the
first two courses of the sequence. An in-depth review of these
courses, carried out together with a study of portions of Ruhi
Institute Book 7 and the continued aid of an experienced tutor,
may further prepare the local friends for this task. As they serve
in this manner and progress in their own study of the courses,
their capacity to help others who desire to serve grows.
Where this approach is wisely applied, it sets a number
of people on the path of learning how to facilitate a process
through which the capacity of individuals eager to contribute to
385

61.8

61.9

61.10

61.11

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

intensifying the community-building process is raised. Further,
by helping larger numbers of people to study institute courses,
it provides as early as possible a growing base of participation
by the local friends in the related activities. But a word of
caution is in order. The desired outcomes are less likely to occur
if the process of raising tutors becomes one in which everyone is
asked to form a study group the moment he or she finishes one
or two courses. In such instances, great effort may be expended
and large numbers briefly obtained, but the result sought of
enabling ever more people to promote the community-building
process remains elusive.

1.1.2 An expanding body of tutors
61.12

61.13

When the services of one or two visiting tutors are reinforced by a few local friends who are learning to offer institute
courses, this team of five or so individuals makes it possible
to expand the number of people studying the courses and
initiating activities, thus intensifying the work under way and
propelling the cluster on its path of progress to move beyond
the second milestone.
Yet, the cluster requires an expanding body of tutors if it is
to continue to advance. If in each cluster the number of those
capable of serving as tutors is to rise, more people from among
those promoting teaching and community-building activities
have to keep advancing along the sequence of courses. For it is
only when ever-growing contingents are immersed in concurrent and sustained study and service that the body of effective
tutors meaningfully expands. This underscores the cumulative
character of the capacity-building process engendered by the
sequence of courses. With each course studied, knowledge
of the Faith increases, insights into spiritual matters deepen,
spiritual susceptibilities expand, requisite qualities and attitudes
develop, and skills and abilities sharpen. Individuals grow in
the ability to investigate the Sacred Writings, to understand
the reality of their community, and to engage in conversations
of significance. They become better able to consult on their
needs, to collaborate with others, and to reflect on and improve
their efforts. As they become ever more conscious of the divine
assistance surrounding them, they grow in confidence. When
such an experience embraces more and more people, and many
of them after studying Book 7 are assisted to form a study
circle and serve as tutors, they apply all these abilities in efforts
386

Supplementary Material
to accompany others on the path of service. In this manner, a
cluster eventually comes to be served by a score or more local
friends capable of acting as tutors. Through their efforts the
number of individuals who are enabled to start and sustain core
activities and other acts of service in the cluster steadily grows.

1.1.3 Raising the effectiveness of those serving as tutors
In its Rid.ván 2010 message, the Universal House of
Justice observed that the worldwide Bahá’í community has
“succeeded in developing a culture which promotes a way of
thinking, studying, and acting, in which all consider themselves
as treading a common path of service,” and has “acquired
the capacity to enable thousands, nay millions, to study the
writings in small groups with the explicit purpose of translating
the Bahá’í teachings into reality.”6 Within this lie the dynamics
of an irrepressible movement that can be fostered in local
populations, and “much will fall on those who serve as tutors
in this respect.”7 The House of Justice further explained:

61.14

Theirs will be the challenge to provide the environment
that is envisioned in the institute courses, an environment
conducive to the spiritual empowerment of individuals,
who will come to see themselves as active agents of their
own learning, as protagonists of a constant effort to apply
knowledge to effect individual and collective transformation. Failing this, no matter how many study circles are
formed in a cluster, the force necessary to propel change
will not be generated.8

61.15

Those responsible for overseeing the work of each institute
are charged with learning how tutors can become increasingly
effective in helping individuals release their potential to contribute to progress within the clusters they serve. In this regard,
there are some specific concerns for each institute to address.
Friends who serve as tutors are most effective when they
understand well the institute’s purpose to raise human resources
that are capable of fostering the process of community building
through the application of Bahá’í teachings. These friends
need to appreciate the nature of the institute process and “the
dynamics that underlie it—the spirit of fellowship it creates, the
participatory approach it adopts, the depth of understanding
it fosters, the acts of service it recommends, and, above all, its
reliance on the Word of God.”9 They must become increasingly

61.16

387

61.17

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

61.18

61.19

familiar with how the process enhances capabilities for serving
the Cause by integrating study, practice, and service. As the
tutors gain experience, they acquire deeper insights into how
each institute book builds on the previous ones to empower
individuals. They grasp the spiritual qualities each course elicits,
the attitudes it promotes, the knowledge it imparts, the skills
it endows, the act of service it introduces, and the interactions
it fosters.
Ultimately, tutors grow to be capable of facilitating the
study of the books in a way that enhances understanding and
shapes attitudes, and of organizing the practical components in
a manner that builds confidence. When tutors help participants
to begin applying, first in the context of the study circle and
then in the community, what they are learning, everyone—the
tutors included—appreciates better the nature of the unfolding
community-building process. Further, tutors promote a spiritually empowering environment and profound friendship among
those studying together. They link budding efforts of these
friends to the process of community building under way and
to the institutions and agencies of the Faith that stand ready to
support all those studying institute courses.
Of course, “the capabilities of a tutor develop progressively
as an individual enters the field of action and assists others in
contributing to the aim of the present series of global Plans.”10
The coordinators of the training institute ensure that those
acting as tutors are properly supported by, among other means,
promoting mutual support and assistance among the tutors,
working alongside them in the field, and gathering them in
meetings for reflection.
Mutual support and assistance

61.20

Coordinators strive to create in a cluster an atmosphere in
which those serving as tutors—new and veteran alike—assist
one another in their service. Experienced tutors make themselves available to those taking their initial steps by either
offering together with them some of the courses or sharing with
them their insights. However, irrespective of the experience of
the individuals involved, carrying out activities together in the
field and drawing on one another’s knowledge serves not only
to strengthen abilities but also to deepen commitment.

388

Supplementary Material
Working alongside tutors and organizing
gatherings for reflection
Coordinators “bring both practical experience and dynamism”11 to their efforts to work in the field with those serving
as tutors. The concrete questions that confront the tutors are
many. For instance, they seek to learn about the nature and
content of a conversation effective at inviting someone to study
Book 1, how to organize the first meeting of a study circle,
how to articulate well the aim of the sequence of courses and
purpose of each book, and how to keep the discussion of the
themes in the course focused and advancing. Many of these
questions are answered in the field as the tutors labor together
with others and are accompanied by a coordinator or a more
experienced colleague.
Such interactions are complemented by regular gatherings
of tutors for reflection and for further study of the courses. In
these occasions, tutors review relevant materials to deepen their
understanding of concepts underlying the institute process and
the Plans of the Faith, reflect on the efforts under way, articulate
their evolving experience, and examine further the books they
are offering. Depending on the number of tutors, these meetings
happen at different levels of the community—a village or neighborhood, a cluster or a number of adjoining clusters, and even
a region or a country. Some gatherings involve all the tutors
and address matters of general interest; others focus on specific
groups, for instance, new tutors, those facilitating a specific
course, or those working with a segment of a population, such
as youth or women. These occasions are most effective when
the consultations of the friends are organized around a set of
questions about which they are learning.

61.21

61.22

1.2 Ensuring a Steady Flow of Participants
through the Sequence of Courses
Capacity to sustain a steady flow of people through the
institute courses expands as the friends in a cluster learn to
engage increasing numbers in conversations on the teachings of
the Faith, nurture the participation of youth, manage a growing
stream of young people from junior youth groups into the main
sequence, and use in a complementary manner study circles and
institute campaigns as modes of course delivery.

389

61.23

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

1.2.1	Fostering conversations on the
teachings of the Faith
61.24

The capacity to involve growing numbers in the study
of institute courses advances along with the ability to foster
increasingly rich conversations about the Bahá’í teachings
within a population. The sequence of courses itself lends some
structure to how these conversations unfold. In its message
dated 29 December 2015, the Universal House of Justice stated:

61.25

From the beginning of the sequence of courses, a participant encounters Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation in considering
such weighty themes as worship, service to humanity, the
life of the soul, and the education of children and youth. As
a person cultivates the habit of study and deep reflection
upon the Creative Word, this process of transformation
reveals itself in an ability to express one’s understanding
of profound concepts and to explore spiritual reality in
conversations of significance. These capacities are visible
not only in the elevated discussions that increasingly
characterize interactions within the community, but in the
ongoing conversations that reach well beyond—not least
between the Bahá’í youth and their peers—extending to
include parents whose daughters and sons are benefiting
from the community’s programs of education. Through
exchanges of this kind, consciousness of spiritual forces is
raised, apparent dichotomies yield to unexpected insights,
a sense of unity and common calling is fortified, confidence
that a better world can be created is strengthened, and a
commitment to action becomes manifest. Such distinctive
conversations gradually attract ever-larger numbers to take
part in a range of community activities.12

61.26

The pattern and quality of the movement of people through
the sequence of courses greatly impacts how conversations on
the teachings advance in a population. The description that
follows, although generalized, will help to illustrate this point.
In a village or neighborhood where a small group begins
to study Book 1, the participants naturally converse on such
spiritual matters as the Word of God, prayer, and the life of
the soul. Praying, reading the writings, and bringing oneself to
account begin to take root among them as a daily discipline.
Possibility for exploring together other themes from the
writings of the Faith grows when these friends are offered and

61.27

390

Supplementary Material
begin reading the Hidden Words, as recommended in the first
unit of Book 1. The reach of this conversation expands when
they initiate visits to the homes of their friends and neighbors
to share prayers. The introduction of a few devotional meetings
provides a space where more people, Bahá’í or not, gather to
pray and reflect on the implications of the Writings for their
individual and collective lifes. This seemingly simple advance
becomes a means for inviting to the study of institute courses
those who show receptivity, leading to an increase in people
entering the path of service.
When some among those who have completed Book 1
come to study Book 2, the themes and concepts on which they
deliberate with others broaden to include, for example, the
eternal Covenant, unity in the community, Bahá’í principles
relating to various social teachings, and others that arise as
the friends learn to respond to the needs of the hearer. The
homes they visit in this connection become additional venues
for profound conversations. Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings on the
spiritual instruction of children—and on the part individuals,
families, and the community play in this regard—begin to be
considered as some study Book 3 and a few children’s classes
are formed. Even a simple event convened with some regularity
for families and neighbors to find out what the children are
learning elevates discussion on the meaning and implication of
a community nurturing its children spiritually.
When some people study Book 4, the conversations begin
to touch more deeply on the Persons of Bahá’u’lláh and the
Báb and on the interplay between crisis and victory that Their
noble lives illustrate. The study of Book 5 fuels exchanges on
Bahá’í teachings relating to spiritually empowering the junior
youth, which, given the societal forces assailing this age group,
resonate with youth, parents, and community leaders. The study
of Book 6 fosters the capacity to engage in “a conversation between two souls”13—a direct teaching effort that “can become a
catalyst for an enduring process of spiritual transformation.”14
Thus, each course studied assists in enabling an expanding
number of friends to express their “understanding of profound
concepts and to explore spiritual reality in conversations of
significance.”15 In this way, a village or a neighborhood is
gradually suffused with discussions founded on the teachings of
the Faith and on the emerging experience in applying them to
creating a new pattern of collective life. With the range of possi391

61.28

61.29

61.30

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

61.31

ble conversations, and “as experience grows, the friends become
more adept at discerning when they have found a hearing ear,
at deciding when to be more direct in sharing the message, at
removing obstacles to understanding, and at helping seekers to
embrace the Cause.”16
The manner in which this capacity to engage a population
in conversations on the teachings is further systematized is
described in the following statement of the Universal House
of Justice:

61.32

As progress continues, the rising capacity for meaningful conversation is harnessed in the plans of the institutions.
By the time cycles of activity have formally emerged, this
capacity is being further stimulated through the expansion
phase that does so much to determine the outcome of each
cycle. The precise objectives of each expansion phase vary,
of course, depending on conditions in the cluster and the
circumstances of the Bahá’í community. In some instances,
its main aim is to increase participation in the core activities; in others, readiness to enroll in the Faith is discovered.
Conversations about the Person of Bahá’u’lláh and the purpose of His mission occur in a variety of settings, including
firesides and visits to homes.17

61.33

Besides portraying how the sequence of courses gives shape
to the unfolding of meaningful conversations on the teachings
of the Faith in a population, what the description above seeks
to show is how the reach, depth, and coherence of these conversations, on the one hand, and the increase in the number of
people studying institute courses, on the other, fuel each other.

1.2.2 	Learning to nurture the participation
of youth in institute courses
61.34

It is clear from the foregoing that much of the progress
of a cluster depends on the ability of the friends to engage a
population in diverse and weighty conversations on the Bahá’í
teachings and then to draw its members into an educational
process that multiplies their powers to contribute to the
building of a new society. It is natural, then, that at any point
in this process the friends would encounter certain particularly
receptive segments of that population. As the House of Justice
has stated, the youth represent “a most responsive element of
every receptive population to which the friends have sought
392

Supplementary Material
to reach out.”18 Initial endeavors to open a particular channel
for the entry of youth into the sequence of courses in a cluster
are necessarily modest. Effort is made—sometimes through
specially organized gatherings—to reach out to a group of
youth, engage them in discussions that open before their eyes “a
compelling vision of how they can contribute to building a new
world,”19 invite them to study the institute courses, and then
assist them to move swiftly into the arena of service. Often this
involves the intensive study of a set of courses such as Books 1,
3, and 5, since the acts of service to which they are first introduced are usually teaching children’s classes and helping groups
of junior youth. As the process of growth advances, the manner
in which the young people study institute courses gradually
comes to conform for the most part to the sequence in which
the courses are arranged. The institute might, however, from
time to time offer some youth a selected number of courses in
order to accelerate the multiplication of activities.

1.2.3	A flow from junior youth groups
into the main sequence
Another channel opens up as more and more of those in
the junior youth groups turn 15 years old and are assisted to
begin studying institute courses. Early in the process of growth
a cluster may experience entry into the main sequence by a few
such young people. The first noticeable flow from the groups
might, however, occur only after the first three or so years
of offering the program. Even then it might be quite modest.
Only when capacity to sustain large numbers of junior youth
in stable groups is present in a cluster does an appreciable flow
happen.
To ensure the smooth transition of young people from the
groups into institute courses, the agencies gradually learn to
track the progression of cohorts of junior youth through the
texts; to help them see, as they near the completion of the
program or the age of 15, the prospects for further study and
service that await them; to organize formal events to welcome
them as individuals or as groups into the main sequence; and to
prepare the tutors, who, in some cases, may be the same friends
who accompanied them as animators, to work well with them.
While the young people “represent a vast reservoir of energy
and talent that can be devoted to the advancement of spiritual
and material civilization”20 and they can do much to boost the
393

61.35

61.36

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

efforts in a cluster, expectations of how fast they can advance
need to remain reasonable. Rushing them through the sequence
for the sole purpose of increasing one activity or another might
in the long term prove counterproductive. It would be best for
them to advance along the sequence of courses at a natural
pace.

1.2.4

Progression along the sequence of courses

61.37

In its message dated 12 December 2011 to all National
Spiritual Assemblies, the Universal House of Justice stated the
following:

61.38

The main sequence of courses is organized so as to
set the individual, whether Bahá’í or not, on a path being
defined by the accumulating experience of the community
in its endeavor to open before humanity the vision of
Bahá’u’lláh’s World Order. The very notion of a path is,
itself, indicative of the nature and purpose of the courses,
for a path invites participation, it beckons to new horizons,
it demands effort and movement, it accommodates different
paces and strides, it is structured and defined. A path can
be experienced and known, not only by one or two but by
scores upon scores; it belongs to the community.21

61.39

In this light, to raise more and more human resources in
each cluster, “an increasing number of friends are recruited to
enter the first basic course, and relatively significant percentages
are then helped to reach higher and higher courses, acquiring
thereby the needed capabilities of service.”22 If only a small
fraction of those who have studied the first course advance
to the second one, and another small fraction of these friends
advance to the third course, and so on, the work of the institute
and ultimately the process of growth itself are robbed of the
required dynamism.
Progress of many people through the sequence of courses
is more likely to occur when the friends are able to associate
their studies to specific action. They are eager to study the
next course in the sequence when they understand that moving
together along a path of service enables them to contribute to
the advancement of their community. Such progress may be
impeded when the courses are inadvertently presented as an end
in themselves or as a mere deepening, when the pace of study
is too slow or too fast, when deliberations on concepts are not

61.40

394

Supplementary Material
associated with experience, or when the practical components
of the courses are neglected.
To ensure that the number of those proceeding along the
sequence is substantial, institute coordinators, often with other
agencies in the cluster, meet periodically to review the flow of
participants from one book to the next. To determine when
undue lag in the progression of many friends has occurred and
what its causes may be, they rely on accurate information about
participation in the courses. On the basis of a sound analysis,
the institute may introduce measures—such as discussions with
the friends, well-timed institute campaigns, and the assistance
of visiting tutors—to remove obstacles standing in the way of
the continued participation of many people.

1.2.5

61.41

The delivery of institute courses

In most clusters worldwide, study circles remain the
predominant mode of delivering institute courses. In a cluster
with a nascent program of growth, the first study circles are
usually formed by visiting tutors or a homefront pioneer. As the
number of local friends who can act as tutors grows, the capacity to establish study circles necessarily increases. Apart from
helping growing numbers to arise and serve, well-functioning
study circles foster among the friends and between them and
the institutions loving and mutually supportive interactions that
bind these protagonists of the Plan together in unified action.
Study circles derive much of their effectiveness from the
fact that they each constitute a small group of friends who
study the courses together in a local setting with the explicit
purpose of learning to apply Bahá’í teachings to their personal
and collective lives and to thus contribute to a profound process
of change. In an environment marked by sincere friendship
and common purpose, the members study the institute courses,
engage in service and extracurricular activities, and promote
this mode of learning to others. As more and more friends
serve as tutors, various segments of a community’s inhabitants—youth, women, mothers, couples, young professionals,
and families—come to be accommodated in the study of the
courses and to play a part in efforts to promote spiritual and
material well-being. The study circles become distinct features
of the life of the community when they operate with a measure
of formality, incorporating elements such as a formal beginning
and ending, a certain membership, and a defined schedule.
395

61.42

61.43

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

61.44

61.45

Also, diverse and expanding numbers of the friends progress
along the sequence of courses when a degree of flexibility is
allowed—the members, for instance, adjust as needed the pace
at which they perform the various activities, and while some
of them may leave when a particular course concludes, others
might join as the study of a new one commences. To ensure
that the study of any particular course is not overly prolonged,
the friends might complement regular study with occasions for
intensive study that might last a weekend or a few days. When
they have a healthy rhythm of progress, study circles do much
to invigorate programs of growth.
In order to accelerate the flow of large numbers of friends
along the sequence of courses, study circles usually operate
alongside institute campaigns. In clusters where there is great
receptivity, campaigns might for a while even be the main mode
of course delivery. Involving the intensive study of two or more
institute courses over a relatively short time, institute campaigns
are held at all levels of the community—local, cluster or group
of clusters, regional, or national. The institutions and friends
of the locality where the campaign is held are often involved in
planning and providing resources, and the campaigns are most
effective when they are scheduled during times of the year when
many people can participate. A team of tutors— some perhaps
drawn from other communities or clusters—may be tasked
with implementing the campaign; these friends are required to
give creative thought to carrying out the practical components
and accompanying the participants to initiate or extend their
acts of service. When offered in a locality, campaigns not only
increase a community’s human resources within a short period
but also raise local capacity to support institute activities and
invigorate the work of teaching and consolidation through the
practice and service activities of the participants.
For the agencies in a cluster, having a record of all study
circles and institute campaigns helps them to draw on the
participants for the tasks of teaching, consolidation, and
community building. Occasionally, the agencies might gather
all those studying institute courses to reflect with them on
their studies and services, to nurture their commitment, and to
help them integrate into the life of the community. As for the
training institute, its responsibility is to design, based on local
circumstances, an approach to course delivery that coherently
combines study circles and institute campaigns so that capacity
396

Supplementary Material
to enable ever-larger numbers of people to progress along the
sequence of courses can continue to grow and become manifest
in an increasingly vibrant process of community building.

1.3 Coordination of the Main Sequence of Courses
The efficacy of the training institute depends largely on
there being at every point as a cluster advances an effective
arrangement for supporting the tutors, visiting or local. When
a program of growth is still nascent, support might come from
a homefront pioneer, a veteran tutor or a coordinator from
a nearby cluster, an Auxiliary Board member or an assistant,
or a regional or national coordinator. As more local friends
begin serving as tutors, the most experienced among them
complement such external assistance by beginning to help others. Often, after a cluster has passed the second milestone, the
number of local tutors begins to notably increase and a local
coordinator is named from among the tutors most willing to
assist others in their services. In his or her efforts to accompany
the tutors, such a coordinator might continue to benefit, on the
one hand, from the support of a more experienced colleague
from an advanced cluster or a regional or national coordinator,
and, on the other hand, from the assistance of capable local
tutors with whom he or she collaborates. In a cluster that has
passed the third milestone, in which the number of tutors grows
even larger, an additional coordinator or two for the main
sequence may be named from among the collaborators. It is,
however, unreasonable to expect that, as a cluster progresses
further, “capacity would be built by simply assigning more and
more coordinators”23 to it. Strengthening mutual support and
assistance among the tutors guarantees that each of them is
always adequately supported.
Irrespective of the scope of the community-building process
in a cluster and the arrangements in place to support the tutors,
the concerns that shape the endeavors of the coordinators are
mostly the same. In general, they ensure that the number of
those acting as tutors rises and capacity among them to offer
the full range of institute courses advances. They pay special
attention to promoting the study of Book 7, help tutors to form
study circles, and aid them to learn to facilitate effectively the
study of the courses and the implementation of the practical
components. New tutors especially require help inviting people
to study the institute courses and enabling the participants to
397

61.46

61.47

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

61.48

61.49

grasp the purpose and workings of a study circle. They often
also benefit from receiving assistance in facilitating the first few
sections of whatever course they are offering. Through such
support, the tutors come to appreciate that individuals persist in
their studies when they see themselves growing in understanding, enhancing their capabilities for service, and engaging in
spiritually enriching interactions. To help the tutors foster such
conditions in their study circles, coordinators, as stated earlier,
cultivate loving collaboration among the tutors, labor alongside
them in the field, and gather them in meetings for reflection.
Depending on the circumstances on the ground, any one
of the coordinators of the three educational imperatives—the
main sequence of courses, the junior youth program, and the
program for spiritual education of children—might be named
first. Initially he or she might also follow the other activities
until other coordinators emerge. And when all are in place, they
learn to complement one another and to periodically “examine
together the strength of the educational process as a whole.”24
In collaborating with members of the Area Teaching Committee
and with the Auxiliary Board members and their assistants,
coordinators—whether there is one or several—contribute to
assessing the progress of the community-building process and
ensuring that the activities in the cluster advance coherently.
When, for instance, the Area Teaching Committee promotes
during each cycle a wide range of conversations on the teachings, the number of people beginning to study the courses can
be expected to rise. Equally, when the coordinator for the main
sequence keeps the Committee informed of all the study circles
and institute campaigns occurring, the Committee can draw on
the participants to advance the teaching work.
At the regional or national level, coordinators for the main
sequence of courses ensure that for each cluster there is an arrangement for supporting the tutors and that this arrangement
is not only effective but also adapts and expands in response
to growth. In this light, they ensure the timely appointment
of cluster coordinators. By working together with the cluster
coordinators in the field and bringing them together in reflection meetings, they help these friends continue to grow in their
capacity to support the tutors. Appreciating the need for all
coordinators at the cluster level to benefit from what is being
learned across the region or country, the coordinators organize
interactions among cluster coordinators that often involve visits
398

Supplementary Material
to clusters where relevant experience is being generated. For a
small region or country, one coordinator may be sufficient. For
a larger one, two or more are needed over time and each may
be assigned to a part of the region or country. As is the case at
the cluster level, regional or national coordinators of the main
sequence also work closely with the coordinators for the junior
youth program and the program for the spiritual education
of children while also collaborating with the Regional Bahá’í
Council, if one exists, and the Auxiliary Board members.
Furthermore, they play a critical part in regional or national
consultative and planning processes.

2.

THE JUNIOR YOUTH SPIRITUAL
EMPOWERMENT PROGRAM

When in its message dated 27 December 2005 the Universal
House of Justice urged all National Spiritual Assemblies to
“consider the junior youth groups formed through programs
implemented by their training institutes a fourth core activity
in its own right,”25 further impetus was given to the expansion
of this vital educational imperative. The progress made since
then has been impressive. Training institutes in almost all
national Bahá’í communities worldwide are now implementing the program, albeit at varying levels of quantitative and
qualitative development. Globally, over 550,000 young people
have already studied at least the first text of the program. Those
currently engaged exceed 150,000 in more than 17,000 groups.
Thousands of youth, who find in the junior youth program “an
ideal arena in which to assist those younger than themselves to
withstand the corrosive forces that especially target them.”26
are serving as animators of the groups, and hundreds of them
as coordinators or assistants to coordinators. Although the expansion has been more remarkable in some parts of the world
than in others, junior youth groups have generally found fertile
soil across a range of social realities—from small villages to the
neighborhoods of large metropolitan cities. More than 2,600
clusters with a program of growth have at least one junior
youth group, and some 70 have 30 or more groups, with 300
or more participants.
Notwithstanding the progress made, the capacity to offer
the program in cluster after cluster has to grow further. Two
broad realities are apparent in this regard: clusters where the
friends are striving to establish an intensive program of growth,
399

61.50

61.51

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

where the junior youth program may be in its early stages;
and clusters where the friends are laboring to embrace large
numbers, where some basic capacity is present on which the
friends are building.

2.1	Clusters Where the Friends are Establishing
an Intensive Program of Growth
61.52

61.53

The knowledge garnered from efforts around the world
makes it possible to visualize with greater clarity the path of
progress of the junior youth program in a cluster. Institutes now
have to apply the available understanding in endeavors to firmly establish junior youth groups in all clusters with a program
of growth. Whether the initial efforts start with young people
from Bahá’í families or those drawn from the wider community,
what needs to be achieved in such clusters may be conceived
as helping the local friends develop the basic capacity required
to establish the program on a sound foundation upon which
it can grow to edify hundreds of junior youth and invigorate
whole communities. This is no easy task. Numerically, it often
involves engaging and sustaining some 50 to 100 junior youth
in about 5 to 10 groups, a capacity that is currently present in
some 600 clusters worldwide.
Experience indicates that there are several dimensions
to the requisite capacity. Principally, there emerges in each
cluster a growing cadre of friends dedicated to the spiritual
empowerment of junior youth. The growth of the program is
greatly facilitated when these friends, however few they may
be, learn to read accurately the reality of their community
and to identify local factors that might propel the program or
curtail its progress. The friends become increasingly capable
of conversing with the community on the empowerment of
the junior youth, a conversation that draws primarily on the
teachings of the Faith about this age group, most of which is
clearly articulated in Book 5 of the sequence of courses. This
conversation also provides opportunity to reflect on certain
elements of the culture of the population that are conducive
or contrary to the spiritual empowerment of young people.
Noteworthy too is engaging ever-growing numbers of youth in
systematic conversations on “the contribution they can make to
the improvement of their society”27 and on “providing for the
needs of others, particularly for younger generations.”28 Inviting
the youth to study institute courses is an essential aspect that
400

Supplementary Material
is fostered from the very start, and this is only possible when
capable tutors of Book 5, whether visiting or local, are available
to each cluster. The study of that course is most effective when,
in determining how to offer it, the conditions of the youth and
their experience are taken into account.
Once a few groups are formed, sustaining them depends on
how the animators are accompanied to learn to facilitate effectively the study of the junior youth texts and to complement it
with artistic activities, social interaction, and service projects.
Pairing them with experienced animators when possible, gathering them in periodic meetings to review the texts, enabling
them to learn from others more experienced, bringing them
together in occasions to study the institute courses and the
junior youth texts have all proved to be effective ways in which
they can be supported. If animators are to grow in capacity to
not just help junior youth but also contribute in various ways to
bettering their communities, they gradually have to be assisted
to appreciate the full extent of the community-building process
unfolding locally and the context within which the junior youth
program is unfolding.
Helping more and more youth to serve as animators
contributes both to an increase in the number of groups and to
the stability and resilience of the program. With more trained
animators, those that leave can be more easily replaced, and if
one animator is unable to facilitate the study of a particular
text, an experienced colleague steps in. When the junior youth
in the groups functioning in a village or neighborhood, or even
in a cluster, are seen as enrolled into one educational system
and their animators as collaborators in supporting all of them,
occasions for coming together to study some of the texts in
camps or to implement service projects together become a more
pronounced feature of the program in a cluster.
The program is strengthened when those overseeing it in a
cluster have explicit and reasonable expectations of what can be
accomplished over the course of a year. Currently nine texts are
available to the junior youth. While it is at present anticipated
that the junior youth will go through at least three texts in the
first year, establishing a rhythm of study that guarantees such
progress sometimes proves difficult. This challenge is best met
when the way in which the program is implemented takes into
account the circumstances of the young people—both junior
youth and youth—in the community, the various activities in
401

61.54

61.55

61.56

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

61.57

61.58

which they are engaged at school and at home, the general
pattern of life of their community, and the periods during the
year of intense and of relaxed activity. Such understanding sets
the stage for how in a cluster the junior youth will proceed
through the texts during a year—when, for instance, they will
study at a regular pace in their groups and when they will all
be brought together in camps for intensive study and service.
Yet another aspect of capacity to establish a sound and
steadily expanding program in a cluster is the involvement of
the parents and the entire community. The conversations that
occur as a group is formed and continue throughout its life
help to build unity of vision, thought, and action. Occasions
when the parents meet and the community gathers to reflect on
the progress and efforts of the junior youth both extend this
conversation and inject into the program the necessary vitality.
When they consult, the parents and the animators explore
together the program’s underlying concepts, efforts to promote
junior youth groups in the community and with other families,
ways to acquire the essential materials, and means to mobilize
resources for camps and other collective endeavors.
As each cluster moves towards the second milestone and beyond, training institutes everywhere will focus on building the
capacity to raise the junior youth program to this basic level.
To assist them in this regard, the Office of Social and Economic
Development at the Bahá’í World Centre has captured the
knowledge and insights thus far generated in a document titled
“Developing the capacity to engage 50 to 100 participants in
the junior youth spiritual empowerment program.” The remarks
above summarize some of the document’s contents. It is hoped
that it will be studied by all the friends promoting the program
at the national, regional, and cluster levels.

2.2 Clusters Where the Friends are Learning
to Embrace Large Numbers
61.59

In all clusters where the capacity described above is present,
the friends are now striving to cultivate further the associated
interrelated abilities. They are enhancing capacity to engage at
least a few hundred junior youth in tens of groups, reaching in
this regard some 300 junior youth in about 30 or so groups.
One question before them in this connection is how to increase
capacity to raise growing numbers of animators in neighborhoods and villages that are becoming centers of intense activity,
402

Supplementary Material
some of which may be ripe for enlisting in the groups the majority, if not all, of the local junior youth. Earlier in the cluster’s
development, one or two tutors of Book 5 may have sufficed to
raise the initial cohort of animators. At this point, more of such
tutors are required if growing numbers of youth, and beyond
them parents and members of local institutions, are to study the
course. Attention to the quality of the junior youth groups also
becomes more pronounced. Animators are closely accompanied
to learn how to consciously help the junior youth enhance the
power of their expression, the acuity of their perception, and
the depth of their interaction. Ongoing and creative thought
is given to service projects initiated by the groups. By drawing
other members of the community into these projects, those
initiatives showing great promise are sustained over longer
periods. With such progress, the junior youth program attracts
the support of many of the local people and leaders who lend
a hand through several means. Additionally, opportunities to
form junior youth groups in other settings such as schools and
community centers arise over time. In these various ways every
aspect of the learning experience in which the young people are
immersed comes to impact markedly their life and that of the
community in general.
Besides being accompanied in their service, youth serving as
animators are supported in other ways as well. In the context
of their service to the Faith and the community, they are, for
instance, encouraged in their formal education and assisted to
think about the prospects for tertiary training and for career development before them. During reflection gatherings, animators
deliberate also on such matters and on other noble aspirations.
In this they receive the aid of not only the institute coordinators
but also other institutions and agencies of the Faith, such as
Auxiliary Board members and Local Spiritual Assemblies.
In a community where the program has reached such a level
of quantitative and qualitative progress, rich conversations on
the moral and intellectual well-being of young people proliferate. These conversations take place in the homes and during
occasions such as devotional gatherings, community meetings,
and institutional conferences. They also become a feature of
the expansion phase of the cycle of activities. Gradually, the
program’s fundamental concepts, aims, and objectives come
to be expressed through other means of communication; for
instance, drama, music, or film. Where the program is operating
403

61.60

61.61

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

61.62

at this level, large numbers of animators are sustaining their
efforts from year to year and progressively more youngsters are
continuing in the groups for the program’s three-year duration.
A growing number of them are beginning to enter the main
sequence of courses and to offer acts of service.
As has been mentioned, there are about 70 clusters worldwide where the program is reaching this level of development
and the friends are involving more than 300 junior youth in the
groups. In some of these clusters the number of participants even
exceeds 1,000. Achieving the progress described above in several
hundred more clusters where the friends are learning to embrace
large numbers is an important aspect of the current Plan. The
part to be played by learning sites in this regard is critical, for
they ensure that the process of learning associated with each
further stage of the program’s growth is effectively extended
and systematized in the clusters with which they are associated.
According to the capacity that exists, they collaborate with
training institutes to carry the work to other advanced clusters.

2.3 Coordination of Junior Youth Groups
61.63

61.64

All of these efforts depend on there being at every point in
the program’s advance a scheme for accompanying animators
that matches the need. As the groups multiply and become
more established, the organizational scheme in place evolves in
complexity. In the early stages, the support of an experienced
individual from a cluster close by may be adequate. This is
soon supplemented by animators working in teams and the
assistance of the more experienced among them. Eventually
one or more coordinators are named from among the local
animators. As they take on their responsibilities they learn from
veteran coordinators in more advanced clusters and collaborate
closely with the cluster coordinator of the main sequence and
of children’s classes, if and when they are in place.
At the regional or national level, a coordinator is named
usually from among the most experienced cluster coordinators.
As the number of junior youth groups increases across the
region or country, an additional coordinator or two is named.
The regional or national coordinators work with the cluster
coordinators in the field and bring them together in meetings
of reflection. Capacity to support the program advances greatly
when a team emerges at the regional or national level composed
of the coordinators and other experienced individuals who, in
404

Supplementary Material
collaboration with the Auxiliary Board members, have a clear
vision of the growth of the program across the entire region or
country. As is the case at the cluster level, close collaboration
with the coordinators of the main sequence and the children’s
education program is an important aspect of the mode of
operation at the regional or national level.
Further, for capacity to grow, the institute and the learning
site, where one is in place, foster a dynamic collaboration. The
regional or national coordinators and the resource persons
work together in the field and, through such spaces as learning
site seminars and institute gatherings, learn from one another.
The knowledge and experience that emerge from the network
of clusters associated with a learning site is transferred to the
training institute, and the insights generated by the training
institute in further extending the reach of the program is shared
with the learning sites.

3.

61.65

THE PROGRAM FOR THE SPIRITUAL
EDUCATION OF CHILDREN

As the Universal House of Justice has stated, “concern for
the spiritual education of children has long been an element of
the culture of the Bahá’í community.”29 Over the last Plan, the
number of children participating in the classes expanded significantly, reaching over 210,000 globally. The growing capacities
of institutes to train teachers and assist them to form classes,
and the expanding mechanisms to support their service and
progress, are among the factors that have contributed to such
growth. Fundamentally, however, it is the mounting dedication
of individuals and institutions—indeed of the community as
a whole—to nurturing and empowering spiritually its young
members that has provided the primary impetus. This is evident
in the fact that the number of children’s classes has increased
most in clusters where junior youth groups have also steadily
multiplied.
The current Plan’s objective of intensifying further the
community-building process in 5,000 clusters worldwide calls
for marked development of the capacity to spiritually educate
children. Some of the particular demands in this regard relate to
clusters where the friends are striving to establish an intensive
program of growth. In most of these clusters, experience with
children’s classes remains largely rudimentary. Other demands
are associated with those clusters where the friends are learning
405

61.66

61.67

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

to embrace large numbers, where most children’s classes are
currently found.

3.1 Clusters Where the Friends are Establishing
an Intensive Program of Growth
61.68

61.69

61.70

In clusters where the experience of the friends with
children’s classes is in its initial stages, a principal need is
establishing a few classes by building organically on whatever
activities are present. From among those engaged in the core
activities and the conversations under way, a few who show
interest in teaching children are trained as teachers and assisted
to form the first two or three classes.
In each cluster with a few classes, a small team of teachers
is learning how to offer, lesson after lesson, the first grade, often
to children of varying ages. Much more is happening, however.
A conversation on “the value of Bahá’í education and of a proper spiritual upbringing”30 is being set in motion; the parents and
teachers are establishing a collaborative relationship; and the
classes themselves are becoming a means to inspiring other people in the community who are inclined to this area of service.
Further, a team of friends who over time might assume various
duties related to promoting children’s classes is emerging from
among the teachers, the parents, and others.
As the classes grow in both quantity and quality, the institute strengthens its capacity to train ever-growing numbers of
teachers and to help them learn to teach grade after grade. A
basic organizational scheme is gradually built, and a pattern of
collaboration among the teachers, parents, and institutions is
progressively put in place.

3.1.1
61.71

Raising the first contingent of teachers

Initial efforts to increase the number of friends teaching
children include raising tutors in a country or region who are
capable of facilitating effectively the study of Book 3 of the
sequence of courses. Initially, most of such individuals are
drawn from among the experienced teachers and tutors in
the more advanced clusters. When they learn to offer Book 3
in a manner that raises the understanding of the participants,
enhances their commitment to the education of children, and
sharpens their skills and abilities, the spiritual education of
children is established on a strong footing.

406

Supplementary Material
Although the first teachers in a cluster may come from any
segment of the population, young mothers and youth—both
boys and girls—tend to be the first to respond. Mothers bring to
the effort their experience of parenting and more readily engage
other parents in related conversations. As for the youth, when
they are involved in deep discussions on their responsibility to
the community, they respond especially well when invited to
work with children and junior youth. Building a team of a few
mothers and youth who collaborate to teach the first few classes
should be a possibility within the reach of every cluster.
Regarding the training, it is, of course, envisioned that those
teaching children would need to have studied at least the first
three courses of the sequence. All the qualities and abilities
treated in these three courses, among them developing spiritual
identity and habits, engaging in systematic conversations, and
teaching a simple class of children, are relevant to a children’s
class teacher. Nevertheless, some flexibility in how individuals
proceed through these courses is often necessary in the early
stages. Friends interested in teaching children have sometimes
studied the first and third courses, formed classes, and then
proceeded to study the second and other courses. In some
instances, forming children’s classes is integrated into the study
of Book 3, so that by the time the teachers finish the course
some classes have already begun. Whatever approach is initially
adopted depends on the experience and circumstances of the
people involved, and the support available.

3.1.2

61.72

61.73

Operation of the classes

At an early stage, the main issues pertaining to the operation of children’s classes include helping the teachers learn
to hold the classes with increasing regularity, become adept
at handling the various components of the lessons in the first
grade, and strengthen relationships with parents. In this regard,
the teachers meet often to review the lessons, explore their
principal spiritual objectives, share experiences, and determine
how to assist one another. To continue to grow in capacity, the
teachers persist in their study of institute courses. As relevant
experience accrues, the teachers’ commitment to spiritually
educating children strengthens, and so does that of the parents
and the community in general. This enables a community to
sustain the initial classes established.

407

61.74

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
61.75

The teachers’ ability to collaborate with parents is another
pertinent issue at this initial stage. Teachers learn to periodically
visit parents in their homes to acquaint them with the progress
being made and to elicit whatever assistance is necessary.
Efforts to enhance this vital relationship are seamlessly integrated into the various activities associated with implementing
the program. For instance, teachers and parents study or review
segments of Book 3 together, and parents occasionally join the
teachers when they come together for reflection. The teachers
and parents are, as a result, increasingly engaged in a conversation that nurtures among them a deep sense of solidarity.
This conversation is gradually extended within the community,
fostering friendship among the families and interactions in
various spaces, including devotional meetings, that serve to
attract the hearts of both children and parents to Bahá’u’lláh.

3.2 Clusters Where the Friends Are Learning
to Embrace Large Numbers
61.76

In advanced clusters, institutes are building on the capacities
so far developed in order to increase significantly the number of
children receiving spiritual education and to organize them in
a systematic program. The training of teachers is being further
augmented; the teachers are learning to offer the first three
grades and higher, as they become available; and the classes are
becoming more formalized. Further, a pattern of coordination
is emerging through which steadily expanding numbers of
teachers in neighbourhoods and villages can be accompanied.
The development of children’s classes in these contexts is
contributing notably to the community-building process.

3.2.1 	The training of teachers and progression
of children from grade to grade
61.77

61.78

Children’s classes multiply significantly as the number of
people advancing through the sequence of courses grows and
some among them join the initial group of teachers in spiritually educating more and more children. This is especially the
case in clusters where the friends are able to engage growing
numbers of youth in meaningful conversations and assist them
to study institute courses.
As the teachers learn to organize Grade 1 classes, they
continue to advance along the main sequence of courses. At
the same time, they are assisted to study the branch courses
408

Supplementary Material
of Book 3 that prepare them to offer the subsequent grades
of the classes for which materials are currently available. The
qualities, skills, and abilities of the teachers sharpen further as
they are brought together periodically in reflection gatherings.
The experience acquired from teaching the classes week
after week and the understanding obtained from participating
with others in gatherings for reflection enable the teachers to
appreciate even further the special nature of the service they are
rendering. Their relationship with the parents of the children
grows stronger as they interact with them more regularly,
whether through home visits, special consultative meetings, or
reflection gatherings. In addition, their ability to contribute to
the community-building process under way advances meaningfully when they play a part in various gatherings where
the community consults, reflects, and plans. All these factors
combine to strengthen the teachers’ dedication to the program’s
objectives, sharpen their vision of its development, and consolidate their resolve to sustain their efforts from year to year.

3.2.2

61.79

Further formalization of the classes

Growth in the number of children receiving spiritual education necessitates more formalization of the classes. Organizing
the children into age-based classes, outlining an annual schedule, and convening special events, such as children’s festivals,
are among some elements of a formal system that receive due
attention. While previously the classes may have included
children of different ages, classes for distinct age groups are
formed as more teachers become available within the locality.
An annual calendar that is consistent with the pattern of life of
the population is established detailing when during a year the
classes generally commence, when they take a break, and when
they close, even as arrangements are made to accommodate new
classes forming at any time during the year. The calendar might
also include dates for reflection gatherings of teachers and other
cluster events that require the participation of teachers and
children. Certain formal meetings are held at particular points
during the year involving teachers, children and their families,
members of the institutions, and other interested individuals in
the community. What the children are accomplishing is shared
with those present, the efforts of both the children and teachers
are acknowledged, and as the children and teachers move from
one grade to the next, some recognition of this achievement
409

61.80

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

is made. Further, as the children advance through the classes,
those turning 12 are welcomed into the junior youth program.

3.3 Coordination of Children’s Classes
61.81

61.82

61.83

61.84

During the early stages of the program’s development,
teachers, however few they may be, learn to function as a
team that meets regularly. The meetings of the team might
initially be spearheaded by the most experienced among them.
Sometimes regional institutes have assigned to each cluster a
veteran teacher or a coordinator from an advanced cluster,
or the Auxiliary Board member might designate a capable
assistant, to visit the teachers regularly and accompany them in
their efforts. Dedication mounts among the teachers when they
are enabled to interact with a larger body of their colleagues
through gatherings hosted in more advanced clusters nearby.
As the number of teachers grows and their experience
deepens, one among them who has demonstrated capacity
to help others is formally designated as coordinator. Such an
individual might, of course, continue to receive assistance from
an experienced coordinator from another cluster as he or she
assumes more formally the tasks of supporting others.
The continued multiplication of the classes in clusters in
which the friends are learning to embrace large numbers in
the community-building process places increasing demands
on the system of coordination. Here, the ability of teachers to
work in teams requires continued strengthening, as does the
ability of experienced teachers to help new teachers or those
starting to teach a new grade. While one coordinator, perhaps
working with a small team of collaborators, can support 10 to
15 teachers, an additional coordinator is often required as the
number of classes expands further. In any case, an organizational scheme emerges over time in an advanced cluster which
will accommodate teams of collaborating teachers; experienced
teachers that help the coordinators support others; and a number of coordinators that ensure the classes are being sustained,
the teachers are growing in capacity, and the families and the
entire community are appropriately engaged.
At the regional or national level, the major concern is, of
course, ensuring that the friends in each cluster are supported
so that, whatever the cluster’s stage of development, children’s
classes increase in both number and effectiveness. Raising tutors
of Book 3 and ensuring that they are available to all clusters
410

Supplementary Material
is, as demonstrated, an indispensable aspect of the support
provided. Making certain that each cluster is served by some
organizational scheme, including drawing on coordinators
and experienced individuals from other clusters as needed, is
another. As coordinators emerge in cluster after cluster, those
serving at the regional or national level assist them in the field
and bring them together in reflection gatherings that address
questions relevant to the stage of development of the children’s
classes in their cluster. All materials in sufficient quantities
and appropriate languages are provided to the teachers and
children at all ages. Careful attention to the flow of knowledge
from advanced clusters, where a greater range of experience is
being generated, makes it possible for other clusters to benefit
and advance expeditiously. And, as is the case with the main
sequence of courses and the junior youth program, over time a
team emerges at the regional or national level composed of the
coordinators and other experienced individuals who, in collaboration with the Auxiliary Board members, grow in capacity to
follow the development of the program.

4.

INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY

The progress of each and all of the institute’s programs
ultimately depends on the strength of the institute as an agency
of the Faith operating at the level of a country or region. There
are currently over 300 training institutes worldwide, which
range in scope from those in small countries with a handful
of clusters with a program of growth to those in large regions
where the number of such clusters might exceed 100. In all but
a few cases, these institutes operate under a board of directors.
Although in general all boards bear the same responsibilities,
their particular operations vary depending on the range of the
institute’s work. At any rate, it is vital that members of a board,
national or regional coordinators, Auxiliary Board members,
and a cadre of believers with the relevant experience learn
to collaborate effectively in supporting the institute’s various
responsibilities.
Irrespective of the scope of the work of the institute, the
board and those with whom it closely collaborates in a region
or country strive to enhance a number of related institutional
capacities. They endeavor to formulate a clear vision of the
progress of the educational processes, foster capacity to learn
systematically and to disseminate the accruing knowledge, and
411

61.85

61.86

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

support a healthy evolution of the institute’s organizational
schemes at the cluster and regional levels. They also labor to
raise capable human resources for the institute’s various purposes, manage effectively financial and material resources, and
address pertinent administrative concerns, especially in relation
to institute staff and statistics. The complexity of each of these
issues naturally grows as the community-building process
advances in an increasing number of clusters across a region.

4.1 Formulating a Vision
61.87

Guidance to foster the growth of the Faith at its current
stage of development is, of course, provided in the messages
of the Universal House of Justice. As the friends study the
guidance, read the reality of their country or region, and reflect
on their experience, they are able to formulate a vision centered
on advancing the two essential movements at the heart of the
process of growth: the steady flow of individuals through the
sequence of courses offered by the training institute and the
movement of clusters along a continuum of development. In
the context of this general vision for the country or region, the
institute articulates its own particular vision for the spiritual
education of the friends for the duration of the Plan. This might
involve not only what is possible to accomplish in each cluster
with regard to the three educational imperatives but also the
main strategies and approaches to be pursued. The institute
then formulates annually a plan and budget and every cycle an
operational plan. Where capacity for such methodical planning
is well developed, the work of the institute is characterized by
clarity of thought and systematic action. Its lines of action are
well-defined, and the deliberations among the friends at the
forefront of its operations are both practical and farsighted.

4.2 Learning and the Ability to Disseminate
the Accruing Knowledge
61.88

The members of the institute board collaborate with the coordinators, the Auxiliary Board members, and other experienced
individuals in “a systematic and concentrated effort … to gather
and apply insights emerging from the grass roots regarding the
promotion of children’s classes, junior youth groups, and study
circles.”31 On their part, regional or national coordinators labor
in the field together with cluster coordinators, converse with
them on their experiences, and observe firsthand the emerging
412

Supplementary Material
strengths and challenges. Regular reflection gatherings that are
informed by what is happening at the grass roots allow for
a deep exploration of the unfolding experience in the region
or country. The deliberations and endeavors of coordinators
might for a period of time concentrate on particular sets of
questions that are critical to achieving continued progress. The
insights obtained from such focused efforts are then appropriately analyzed and shared with others. A cluster in which
significant experience is gained may in this regard be used to
host gatherings of coordinators from other clusters and dispatch
experienced individuals to other clusters to work with local
friends in the field. This is an approach to disseminating learning
that has worked well with learning sites for the junior youth
spiritual empowerment program, and it is now being applied in
some form in the context of groups of adjoining clusters that
are organized around one or more clusters which can offer “a
valuable source of knowledge and experience and represent a
reservoir of human resources.”32 Further, some institutes are also
capturing lessons learned by creating documents that serve as
dynamic records of efforts to address a few key questions. With
some of the knowledge generated globally about learning as a
mode of operation now presented in Book 10, it is hoped that
the study of that course will help training institutes themselves
achieve even more notable advances in this capacity.

4.3 The Evolution of Organizational Schemes
Those overseeing the work of the institute in a country or
region gradually grow in their understanding of how organizational schemes emerge and evolve as a cluster advances. The
overriding concern, of course, is ensuring that at every stage,
a cluster is served by an appropriate arrangement and that capacity for coordination keeps pace with growth in activity. This
requires that there is at the regional or national level “an acute
awareness of circumstances on the ground,”33 the basis upon
which decisions with regard to coordination are then made.
In some clusters, an experienced person from another cluster
is assigned to assist the friends. In others, a few local friends
who are showing capacity to assist are accompanying those
who have initiated core activities. In still others, coordinators
are formally named, while eventually, multiple coordinators
working in teams, each with a few collaborators, are raised. A
regular review of the organizational arrangements in clusters
413

61.89

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

61.90

and groups of clusters across the country or region, and of the
mechanisms in place to provide the necessary support, is an
essential aspect of the responsibilities borne at the national or
regional level.
Structures at the national or regional level evolve to attend
to these organizational needs of clusters. Periodic assessment
should help those overseeing the institute’s work to determine
in a timely manner when to reinforce or adjust whatever
arrangement is in place. When to name a regional or national
coordinator for each of the three educational activities; when,
as activity increases, to appoint additional ones from among
those gaining experience in clusters; how to build teams of
friends at the regional level to help follow each program; when
to assign coordinators to work in parts of the region—are
all matters that are progressively addressed. The latter point
requires an additional comment. In large regions where regional
coordinators are assigned to follow a number of clusters
or even groups of adjoining clusters, they are increasingly
operating at the level of a sub-region. As a consequence, a
distinct administrative role at the regional level is emerging,
and, in some cases an individual is engaged to support the
coordinators operating at the sub-regional level by managing
funds, distributing materials, collating statistics, and organizing
reflection gatherings.

4.4 Enhancing the Capacity of the Institute Itself
61.91

As more and more clusters advance and the work of the
institute increases in complexity, well-defined measures are
introduced to help cluster and regional or national coordinators to grow in capability, heightening their knowledge of the
Faith, their understanding of the Plan’s overarching conceptual
framework, and their appreciation of the nature and purpose
of the institute process. Their ability to explore the reality of
their region or country, to assess progress, and to plan effectively can be enhanced, and certain practical abilities such as
using statistical information in reflection and planning and
managing judiciously the funds of the Faith can be developed.
Capacities such as building environments of cooperation and
unity are also cultivated. Some of these capacities are acquired
naturally through experience as coordinators are assisted to
carry out their work. Institutes identify other practical means
to help coordinators develop necessary abilities. For instance,
414

Supplementary Material
individuals with relevant experience can help others; at times
the institute can draw on other educational programs of the
Faith, such as those offered by Bahá’í-inspired agencies; and,
in some cases, coordinators and others serving the institute full
time have been supported to attend relevant training programs
offered by various institutions of learning.
In addition, an institute can benefit from the contributions
of other individuals with specialized skills who are involved in
the general community-building work of the Faith. Examples
of such skills include translating educational materials, managing finances, and documenting learning. Through ongoing
assessment of the institute’s evolving human resource needs
and review of the measures in place to raise the capacity of the
friends serving as staff or as volunteers, those overseeing the
institute’s work determine ways of drawing on the friends with
such abilities.

61.92

4.5 Managing Effectively the Financial
and Material Resources
Managing with care the financial resources pertains to all
aspects and levels of the institute’s operations. When they are
planning and budgeting, the friends consider not only what
comes from the Funds of the Faith but also what the local
friends and community can offer through whatever means
available to them. On their part, institute boards, in collaboration with coordinators and Auxiliary Board members, ensure
that each activity at the grass roots has the required resources.
In that light, effective channels for the flow of funds from the
national or regional to the cluster level are put in place, and
simple and straightforward arrangements for maintaining
accurate accounts are made. Awareness that the resources
of the friends and the funds of the Faith are precious and
not unlimited generates commitment to efficiency. Financial
management itself is approached with an attitude of learning,
and practices such as periodic budget monitoring and annual
financial reporting and auditing are established.
An effective system for the production and distribution of
institute materials is, of course, vital. Sometimes lack of such
a system has disrupted the progress of the three educational
imperatives and the vitality of the community-building process
itself. Careful thought is to be given to how the materials are
stored and how they are provided to each individual studying
415

61.93

61.94

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

the courses so that unnecessary waste does not occur. Some
institutes utilize various approaches in this regard. They ensure
that cluster coordinators have access to basic storage space and
that when participants can afford to purchase the texts they are
encouraged to do so.

4.6 Some Administrative Aspects
4.6.1
61.95

Remuneration of institute staff

An important aspect of the management of financial
resources is the remuneration of institute staff. As the number
of study circles, children’s classes, and junior youth groups
expands in a country or region, more and more people deepen
their sense of ownership and desire to contribute to the betterment of society, and some among them dedicate a substantial
amount of their time to the work of the institute. From among
those serving as coordinators, some might require financial
assistance for a period of time. There are a number of principles to be considered by institutes in this regard. Of course,
capacity for coordination cannot be built by simply multiplying
the number of coordinators serving full-time and receiving
remuneration. At the cluster level, the remuneration offered to
some coordinators is essentially a short-term arrangement that
is arrived at through conversation with each individual being
invited to serve in this manner and requiring such assistance.
Based on determined needs, factors that could be taken into
consideration include “whether the person resides in a rural
or urban area, is required to change residence, has a family,
or intends to pursue further education.”34 While decisions
made will differ from one person to another, the system will
reflect an overall consistency. Additional considerations may
be necessary at the regional or national level. Some of the
friends serving full-time and receiving remuneration might,
for instance, need to continue receiving such assistance for an
extended period in order to ensure that the learning processes
across the entire region or country are sustained. In any case, it
can be expected that whether at the cluster, regional, or national
level, the needs of some individuals might sometimes “exceed
what can reasonably be met by the funds of the Faith.”35 A
realistic range of remuneration can be established. In creating a
framework for offering remuneration to the friends, a National
Spiritual Assembly, in consultation with the Counsellors and the
416

Supplementary Material
institute board, determines what would, in general, constitute
a reasonable period during which an individual serving as a
cluster coordinator or as a regional or national coordinator
may be provided with remuneration.

4.6.2

Managing statistics

The availability of accurate and up-to-date statistical information helps the friends overseeing the work of the training
institute to “remain fully acquainted with developments at the
grass roots and what is being learned in the clusters whose
progress they oversee.”36 The information is, of course, essential
in the institute’s planning and decision-making processes. A
proper system for gathering and analyzing statistical information requires that effective instruments are put in place for this
purpose, and the Statistical Report Program (SRP) is helpful in
this regard. A new version of this tool—combining its earlier
versions and the Cluster Growth Profile—is already being used
in many regions and clusters. Ultimately, effective management
and use of statistics depends on close collaboration between
cluster coordinators and Area Teaching Committees, as well as
between national or regional coordinators and Regional Bahá’í
Councils.

61.96

4.7 The Training Institute Board
As institutes advance as organizational structures, the
role of institute boards assumes ever-greater importance. The
members of an institute board are appointed by the National
Spiritual Assembly or Regional Bahá’í Council, in consultation
with the Counsellors, usually for a term of two to three
years. Through various means, including meetings and special
occasions for consultation, boards watch over the work of the
institutes. They follow the unfoldment of the learning processes
associated with study circles, children’s classes, and junior
youth groups, facilitate the formulation of vision, pay attention
to the administrative matters of institutes, and liaise closely
with the Counsellors and with National Assemblies or Regional
Councils, as the case may be. When they are composed of individuals with the requisite experience and who are personally
involved in the community-building process, and when they
are able to foster effective consultative relationships with
others, appreciable progress can be made in a relatively short
period of time. Although all do not function in the same way
417

61.97

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION

and the issues they face vary in complexity, growing demands
on institutes to continue attaining higher and higher levels
of functioning require that boards too become increasingly
capable of carrying out their responsibilities.

418

Supplementary Material
REFERENCES
1 Message dated 29 December 2015 written by the Universal
House of Justice to the Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors.
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid.
4 Message dated 12 December 2011 written by the Universal
House of Justice to all National Spiritual Assemblies.
5 Message dated 29 December 2015.
6 Rid.ván 2010 message written by the Universal House of Justice
to the Bahá’ís of the world.
7 Ibid.
8 Ibid.
9 Message dated 28 December 2010 written by the Universal
House of Justice to the Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors.
10 Rid.ván 2010 message.
11 Ibid.
12 Message dated 29 December 2015.
13 Rid.ván 2010 message.
14 Ibid.
15 Message dated 29 December 2015.
16 Ibid.
17 Ibid.
18 Ibid.
19 Ibid.
20 Message dated 27 December 2005 written by the Universal
House of Justice to the Conference of the Continental Boards of
Counsellors.
21 Message dated 12 December 2011.
22 Letter dated 24 December 1997 written on behalf of the
Universal House of Justice to a National Spiritual Assembly.
(Also quoted in “Training Institutes”, a document prepared for
and approved by the Universal House of Justice, April 1998).
23 Letter dated 24 December 2014 written on behalf of the
Universal House of Justice to a National Spiritual Assembly.
24 Message dated 12 December 2011.
25 Message dated 27 December 2005.
26 Message dated 29 December 2015.
27 Ibid.
28 Ibid.
29 Rid.ván 2010 message.
30 Rid.ván 1996 message written by the Universal House of Justice
to the followers of Bahá’u’lláh in Western and Central Asia.
31 Message dated 29 December 2015.

419

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
32
33
34
35
36

Ibid.
Message dated 28 December 2010.
Letter dated 24 December 2014.
Ibid.
Message dated 29 December 2015.

420

Index
‘Abdu’l-Bahá
Covenant, 8.3, 9.7, 9.11,
9.27–28
establishment of the Faith in
the West, 15.1–5, 18.5,
21.1–3, 21.11, 28.1–3,
32.8, 38.2, 57.6
exemplar, 7.12, 15.3, 18.5,
28.2–3, 28.6, 36.4
and institutions of the Faith,
8.2, 9.4, 9.12, 9.17,
16.22, 16.41, 59.4
quote, 1.32, 7.8, 9.2, 9.9–10,
9.12, 9.18–20, 9.25,
9.29–32, 10.7, 14.33,
15.4, 16.22, 16.30, 16.41,
16.43, 21.1–3, 21.9, 22.4,
23.7, 23.15, 24.10, 27.3,
28.6, 29.6, 30.6, 32.10,
33.8–9, 42.3, 51.2, 55.5,
59.18–19, 59.22, 60.84
Will and Testament, 8.5,
9.3–5, 9.8–12, 9.14, 9.27,
18.2, 36.2 See also Divine
Plan; House of Worship
accompaniment (concept), 1.8,
1.25–26, 7.10, 14.12,
14.19, 16.8, 17.1, 19.4,
22.1, 23.6, 24.3, 28.6,
30.5, 35.9, 35.36, 51.10,
53.2, 54.5, 56.6, 57.2,
57.4, 59.28, 60.8, 60.12,
60.33, 60.51, 60.53,
60.56, 60.67, 60.73,
61.13, 61.21, 61.36,
61.44, 61.46, 61.54,
61.59–60, 61.63, 61.76,
61.81, 61.89
accomplishments, 1.3–4, 1.9,
1.14, 1.17, 1.30–31, 4.1,
4.8–9, 6.4, 8.1, 8.6, 9.21,
10.1, 12.1, 14.1–2, 14.10,

421

14.13, 14.20, 15.1, 16.1,
16.11, 16.37, 17.1, 23.15,
24.3, 32.7, 35.1, 35.5,
35.52, 37.1, 37.5, 38.3,
39.3, 41.3, 43.7, 46.1,
48.1, 51.2, 54.6, 55.6,
59.5, 59.10, 59.61, 60.1,
60.7, 60.14
advancing the process of entry
by troops, 1.1, 1.3, 1.6,
1.16, 2.4, 4.10, 5.4,
6.1–2, 10.2, 14.1, 14.8,
21.8, 28.5, 35.2, 38.3,
41.2, 41.4, 48.1, 49.3
Africa, 2.7, 18.6, 21.8–9, 25.1,
32.3, 32.8, 34.6, 45.7,
50.9, 56.2, 60.11, 60.23
animators. See under junior
youth
Area Teaching Committee, 1.18,
14.21, 16.7, 16.18, 16.21,
16.32, 20.11, 35.11,
35.27, 50.3, 53.2, 56.3,
57.1, 57.4–5, 60.3, 60.24,
60.53, 60.65, 60.78,
61.48, 61.96. See also
under Regional Bahá’í
Councils
arts, 1.11, 7.6, 10.7, 16.36,
20.17, 20.19, 58.4–5,
61.54
Assemblies
Local Spiritual Assemblies,
1.19–1.22, 4.8, 8.2, 9.21,
14.22–23, 16.18–26,
30.3, 35.18, 35.23, 35.27,
35.32, 45.3, 45.7, 45.13,
56.7, 59.35, 60.3, 60.23,
60.25, 60.44
		 attributes of, 16.25
		 trusted ones of the
Merciful, 1.20

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
		 election of, 5.4, 5.6
		 development, 1.19, 1.20, 14.22,
16.19
		 general responsibilities of, 1.17,
1.19, 14.22, 16.21, 16.26–27,
35.28, 40.2, 45.13, 51.2, 52.2,
56.5, 60.25, 61.60
		 two-stage electoral process, 1.21
National Spiritual Assemblies,
1.17–18, 1.26, 1.28, 2.2–3, 3.4,
4.2, 4.8–9, 6.2, 8.4, 8.6, 9.21–23,
11.5, 14.23, 14.28, 16.18–19,
19.3, 20.2, 21.9, 24.7, 24.9, 25.1,
26.1, 26.4, 31.7, 32.3, 32.8, 34.6,
35.11–12, 35.43, 36.3, 40.2, 42.8,
45.2, 45.7, 45.13, 46.4, 47.1,
48.2, 50.3, 50.10–11, 52.8, 53.2,
55.8, 58.4
		 collaboration with Counsellors,
1.18, 1.28, 2.2, 35.21, 53.4,
61.95, 61.97
		 election of, 5.4, 5.6, 26.2, 26.4
		 external affairs, 1.17
		 responsibilities for the Plan,
14.23–24, 16.31, 21.5, 40.2, 46.4,
51.2, 61.37, 61.50, 61.89, 61.95,
61.97

20.19, 21.2, 21.6, 23.6, 23.12,
23.15, 24.12, 27.2, 27.6, 30.4,
32.7–9, 35.2, 35.14, 35.24, 58.5,
59.14, 60.20, 61.25
Shrine of, 4.10
World Order of, 5.2–4, 8.3, 8.9, 11.4,
12.1, 14.5, 14.26, 16.13–14,
16.39, 16.41, 18.4, 20.4, 31.8,
34.4, 35.25, 39.3, 55.5, 58.2,
60.80–81, 61.38
capacity building, 1.6, 6.4, 10.6, 14.26,
16.20, 16.22, 20.7, 20.15, 23.11,
35.25, 35.31, 36.1, 47.2, 52.5,
59.6, 59.27, 59.60, 60.22, 60.74,
60.76, 60.78, 61.2, 61.5–14,
61.23–40, 61.42, 61.44–47,
61.49, 61.51–54, 61.57–59,
61.62, 61.64–65
Central Asia, 38.2
childhood, humanity’s, 14.10, 16.34,
21.6
children, 1.26, 6.4–5, 10.1, 16.15, 18.5,
20.18–19, 23.6, 24.1, 28.2, 33.5,
35.39, 35.49, 37.5, 50.9, 58.6,
60.29, 61.75
children’s classes, 1.10–11, 1.18, 1.31,
14.5, 14.13–15, 16.4, 16.16,
20.12–13, 20.16, 20.19, 21.9,
35.8, 35.23, 35.44, 49.5, 50.2,
50.5, 50.9, 53.2, 57.3–4, 60.12,
60.27, 60.32, 60.42, 60.44, 61.28,
61.34, 61.66–69, 61.73–77,
61.84, 61.88 (see also core activities; teaching: children’s classes;
training institutes: children’s
classes)
		 and community-building process,
14.14, 55.3, 60.16–21, 60.55,
61.66–67, 61.76, 61.79–80,
61.83, 61.97
		 coordinators of, 14.12, 14.14, 16.6,
20.11–12, 35.26, 53.2, 60.12,
60.54, 60.72, 60.74, 61.63–64,
61.76, 61.80–84, 61.88, 61.95
		 and other acts of service, 61.69,
61.79
		 youth, 60.55, 61.72, 61.77

Badí‘ calendar, 31.1–8
Twin Birthdays, 31.4, 39.4
Bahá’í World Centre, 4.2, 4.10, 8.4,
8.6, 20.12, 21.10, 24.7, 24.9,
31.7, 32.3, 34.6, 43.5, 47.4, 56.8,
59.5–6, 60.13, 61.58
Bahá’u’lláh
Covenant of Bahá’u’lláh, 4.8, 9.2,
9.11–15, 9.28
love, 19.2, 34.3, 44.2, 51.8, 52.2–3,
60.37, 60.84
quote, 4.5, 9.13, 7.7–9, 8.5, 9.5–6,
9.13, 10.6, 14.25, 16.33, 16.41,
17.2, 18.3, 21.4, 24.1, 24.12,
27.4, 29.7, 31.3–4, 32.1, 33.1,
34.2, 35.39, 35.46, 35.52–53,
42.3, 42.7, 44.2–3, 51.4–8, 58.6,
59.43, 59.57–58, 59.67, 60.10
Revelation, 4.3, 6.6, 7.11, 10.2, 14.2,
14.9, 14.25, 14.29, 16.15, 20.15,

422

Index
		 and junior youth spiritual empowerment program, 61.80, 61.84
		 teachers, 2.4, 13.1, 14.14, 14.21,
16.2, 16.21, 20.2, 20.5, 20.13,
20.15, 20.17–18, 20.21, 24.3,
26.5, 35.10, 35.23, 35.26, 52.8,
53.2, 59.56, 60.3, 60.11–12,
60.15, 60.29, 60.38, 60.51, 60.54,
60.72, 61.67–81, 61.84
			reflection gatherings, 61.81,
61.84, 61.97 (see also Ruhi
Institute: courses)
families of, 1.7, 13.1, 14.14, 14.27,
16.33, 18.5, 20.14, 30.3, 33.6,
35.14, 35.27, 35.38, 59.1,
60.12, 60.27, 60.29, 60.42–44,
60.58, 61.69, 61.72, 61.74–75,
61.79–80, 61.83
programs for the education of, 1.26,
4.9, 10.1, 11.4, 14.3, 14.14,
14.19, 14.27, 16.2, 16.21–22,
17.1, 20.4–5, 20.8, 20.14, 20.16,
20.18, 24.3, 24.6, 27.4, 28.3,
32.7, 33.6, 34.3, 35.2, 35.14,
35.30, 35.32, 42.6, 51.10, 55.3,
59.1, 59.30, 59.36, 59.56,
60.11–12, 60.15, 60.20, 60.27,
60.40, 61.4–5, 61.25, 61.28,
61.48–49, 61.64, 61.66–84
cluster, 1.2, 1.18, 1.28, 14.27, 14.32,
16.31, 17.2, 18.6, 22.1, 24.2,
30.2, 34.7
administration, 14.21, 16.8, 16.17–18,
20.11–12, 21.5, 24.5, 28.3
advanced, 1.9, 1.12, 19.1, 20.10,
20.12, 21.5, 24.3, 30.4, 61.1,
61.9, 61.46, 61.62–63, 61.71,
61.76, 61.81, 61.83–84
capacity, 27.6, 61.1–2, 61.6, 61.10,
61.12–13, 61.91
development of the, 20.3
clusters helping clusters, 35.5, 61.9
and Local Spiritual Assembly, 1.19,
16.19
milestones, 16.4, 35.4
		 first, 16.4–5, 16.11, 35.4–6, 60.31,
60.34, 60.41–42, 60.45, 60.47,
60.53

		 frontiers of learning, 16.11–16,
14.26, 14.32, 16.11–12 ,
16.16–17, 20.1, 24.3, 28.3, 35.33,
38.3, 56.2, 56.7, 60.1–2, 60.59,
60.70, 60.77
		 movement from first to the second,
16.6–11, 35.4, 35.7–21, 60.34,
60.46, 60.53, 60.59, 61.58
		 movement from the second to the
third, 16.12–16, 35.4, 35.22–31,
61.12, 61.46
		 movement beyond the third, 61.1,
61.46
movement of, 1.29, 2.3, 30.2, 61.3,
61.26, 61.38–39, 61.87 (see also
under movement)
reservoir, 16.11, 19.1, 35.21, 60.72,
61.88
sustaining growth, 1.2, 1.20, 1.24,
1.27, 1.29, 3.2, 4.9, 6.3–4,
10.3–4, 10.8, 11.2, 11.4, 14.21,
16.4, 16.10, 16.18, 16.22, 16.29,
20.3, 26.5, 28.3, 30.1, 34.3,
35.7–8, 35.12, 35.16, 35.18,
35.21, 35.23, 35.27, 35.31,
35.33, 35.43–44, 39.1, 39.4, 40.1,
41.3–4, 45.4, 46.2, 49.4, 50.4,
50.7–8, 50.11–12, 56.3–4, 57.2,
57.4, 57.6, 58.4, 59.1, 59.11,
60.2–4, 60.7–10, 60.19, 60.22,
60.24, 60.31–33, 60.35–40,
60.43–44, 60.47, 60.57, 60.59,
60.63, 60.66, 60.68–69, 60.72,
60.75, 60.77, 61.2, 61.6, 61.8,
61.13, 61.23, 61.35, 61.52, 61.54,
61.60–62, 61.74, 61.79, 61.83,
61.95 (see also community:
growth of)
coherence, 1.10–11, 10.7, 12.1, 14.29,
14.32, 16.1, 16.24, 21.5, 21.9,
23.9, 23.11, 24.9, 24.11, 30.3,
35.12, 35.16, 35.48, 41.4, 43.3,
46.1, 47.1, 47.4, 49.4, 49.7, 54.3,
54.5, 55.3, 57.1, 58.2, 59.12–13,
59.18, 60.2, 61.33, 61.45, 61.48
in life of service, 15.5, 22.4, 28.4,
33.7, 35.46, 52.3
community, 23.6

423

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
administrative arrangements, 26.3
building, 1.26, 13.1, 14.5–6, 14.14,
14.23, 16.19, 20.19, 21.9, 22.2,
23.16, 24.4, 24.6, 24.10, 27.4,
27.6, 60.74, 61.11–13, 61.17–18,
61.45–48, 61.54, 61.66–67,
61.76, 61.79, 61.83, 61.86, 61.92,
61.94, 61.97
capacity of, 1.3, 4.9, 11.1, 11.3–4,
12.1, 14.8–9, 14.18, 14.26, 16.2,
16.14, 16.19, 18.2, 25.2, 61.32,
61.44
challenging issue confronting, 16.34,
23.14
coherence of, 1.11, 14.32, 16.22, 24.5,
24.9
collective life of, 1.11, 6.5, 14.9,
16.23, 16.28, 16.30, 20.4, 23.5,
23.16, 24.5–7, 24.10, 26.6,
61.59–60
culture of, 14.13, 14.16, 14.19, 16.38,
16.40, 61.28, 61.61, 61.66, 61.72,
61.74
		 mode of learning, 14.21, 14.24,
23.10
development of, 1.13–15, 8.1–2, 8.6,
10.2, 11.3, 12.1, 16.3, 16.13–14,
16.34, 16.40, 16.44, 18.4, 20.14,
20.18, 21.5–6, 24.11, 32.1, 35.38,
41.2, 59.30, 60.38, 60.47
definition of, 16.40–41, 23.17
devotional character of, 10.1, 14.5,
14.27, 16.2, 16.21, 21.9, 23.10,
24.5, 24.10, 35.49, 39.3, 59.30,
61.75
environments of true understanding,
21.3–4, 24.3, 58.6 (see also read
reality)
focus, ability to maintain, 1.16–17
of Greatest Name, 1.1, 1.32, 2.4, 3.4,
4.8, 4.11, 7.4, 7.10, 8.1, 8.4, 8.7,
9.3, 9.22, 9.27, 9.29, 10.8, 11.4,
12.1, 14.16, 14.26, 14.33, 16.3,
16.11, 16.14, 16.34, 16.43, 17.2,
18.6, 19.1, 20.19, 21.2, 21.4,
23.1–2, 23.8, 23.14, 23.17, 24.12,
26.2, 27.2, 28.2

growth of, 1.2, 3.2, 4.9–10, 10.8,
14.22, 16.12, 16.14, 16.22, 16.24,
20.9, 26.5, 61.3
involvement with prevalent discourses
of society, 14.27–28, 14.31–32,
16.24–25, 23.15–16, 23.17,
24.6–9, 28.3
Iranian. See Iran
leaders, 61.29
members of, 1.11, 5.4–5, 6.5, 16.23
national, 1.2, 1.28, 16.31
outreach, 1.29, 14.26, 61.52
patterns of community life and
thought, 1.15–16, 1.24, 2.6,
4.9, 5.6, 14.8, 14.27, 20.2, 20.4,
23.15, 27.6, 61.25
participation, 6.1, 6.4, 10.2, 14.4,
14.7, 14.22, 14.26, 16.15, 20.2,
22.3, 24.10, 61.25, 61.57, 61.59,
61.69, 61.83
process of learning, 23.9–12
sense of purpose, 4.2, 14.7, 24.12,
27.2
spirit, 16.6, 21.5
spiritual foundations of, 1.12, 1.17,
14.22, 16.21, 16.23, 16.31–32,
16.35, 17.1, 20.21, 21.6, 23.15,
24.10
training institute and the, 2.7, 24.3,
61.25, 61.38, 61.40, 61.43, 61.46
unity of, 6.6, 16.35, 16.43, 21.6,
23.15, 27.7, 61.28 (see also unity
of vision, thought and action)
vitality of, 1.9, 14.22, 14.32, 16.24,
18.6, 20.8
core activities, 1.10, 1.25–26, 1.29, 6.5,
14.5–6, 14.14–15, 14.17–18,
14.27, 16.2, 16.4, 16.6, 16.21–22,
20.8, 20.11–12, 24.3–4, 24.6,
35.15, 35.18, 41.1–4, 45.11,
50.1, 50.8, 55.3, 57.4, 58.4,
59.1, 59.7, 60.8, 60.14–16,
60.19–21, 60.24–25, 60.29,
60.33, 60.43–46, 60.49, 60.52,
60.55–56, 60.60–61, 60.65,
60.82, 61.13, 61.32, 61.50,
61.68, 61.89 (see also devotional
meetings; children: children’s

424

Index
classes; junior youth: groups;
Ruhi Institute: courses; training
institutes: children’s classes)
fourth core activity, 1.26, 61.50 (see
also under junior youth)
Counsellors. See Institution of the
Counsellors
Covenant, 2.4, 4.8, 8.1, 8.6, 9.1, 9.11,
9.13, 9.15, 9.28, 9.30, 14.26,
15.1, 16.35, 26.5, 28.1, 31.5,
37.3, 37.5, 39.3, 61.28
Covenant-breakers, 9.25, 9.27–29,
9.31
International Bahá’í Court, 9.16, 9.24

51.10, 52.3, 54.8, 60.4, 60.11,
60.14–15, 60.20, 60.49, 60.64,
61.2, 61.34, 61.48, 61.86
elections, Bahá’í, 5.1–9
encouragement, 1.17, 1.31, 14.23, 16.5,
16.21, 24.5, 27.5, 35.37, 45.13,
50.7, 51.10, 52.3, 56.5, 56.7,
59.29, 59.37, 60.25, 60.67–68,
61.10, 61.60, 61.94
entry by troops, 1.1, 1.3, 1.6, 1.16, 2.4,
4.10, 5.4, 6.1, 10.2, 14.1, 14.8,
21.8, 28.5, 35.2, 38.3, 41.2, 41.4,
48.1, 49.3
single aim, 1.16, 6.2
Europe, 9.18, 32.8, 38.2, 51.1–2
expansion, 1.15, 1.24–25, 3.2, 6.2,
11.1, 14.1, 14.26, 14.32, 16.1,
16.14–15, 16.39, 25.2, 61.50
and consolidation, 1.18, 1.22, 2.4,
3.2, 6.2, 6.4, 14.10, 14.21, 16.4,
16.7, 16.10, 16.12, 16.15, 16.19,
16.39, 20.1, 21.9, 34.1, 50.11,
55.6, 60.48, 60.55, 61.44–45
(see also focus: expansion phase;
intensive program of growth)
external affairs, 4.8, 4.10, 34.6, 49.5

decentralization, 35.28, 50.11
of Feast, 35.28, 45.3, 45.6–7
of reflection meeting, 16.17, 56.2
deepening 1.11, 2.6, 14.7–10, 35.27,
41.1–3, 43.7–8, 44.2, 49.5, 55.3,
61.40
development of human resources, 1.2,
1.10, 1.24, 1.27, 4.9, 6.2, 6.4,
10.1, 11.2, 14.5, 14.12, 14.27,
14.29, 16.3–4, 16.10, 20.14, 24.4,
24.7, 35.2, 35.21, 35.23, 39.3,
41.3, 43.7, 44.3, 46.3, 50.6, 57.2,
59.1, 59.6, 59.10, 59.28, 59.34,
59.36, 60.3, 60.16–17, 60.31,
60.44–45, 60.48–49, 60.53,
60.55, 60.58, 60.60, 60.64, 60.72,
60.79, 61.17, 61.39, 61.44, 61.86,
61.88, 61.92
devotional meetings, 1.10–11, 1.24,
1.31, 28.3, 35.27, 35.49, 49.5,
60.42, 60.44, 60.53, 61.27, 61.61,
61.75. See also core activities
Divine Plan, 15.3, 15.5, 16.12, 16.31,
16.40–41, 17.1, 18.2, 24.2, 30.1,
35.21, 35.51, 36.2, 36.4, 37.1–5,
38.1–4, 39.3, 39.6, 41.2, 48.1,
49.3, 55.3, 55.6, 58.6, 60.61

firesides 1.7, 1.24, 6.5, 35.15, 41.1,
57.4, 61.32. See also teaching
Five Year Plan
2001–2006, 1.1–2, 1.26, 2.3, 3.1, 4.1,
6.4
2006–2011, 1.3, 2.1, 4.2, 4.10–11,
5.4, 6.1, 11.1, 13.1, 18.2, 19.2,
47.2, 49.1, 60.75, 60.78
		 1,500 intensive programs of growth,
14.1
		 requirements, 14.1, 14.15, 14.22,
17.1
2011–2016, 16.1, 16.28, 16.36, 20.8,
22.1, 24.3, 28.4, 28.6, 33.1, 35.5,
35.47, 50.1, 50.13, 53.1, 57.1,
60.41, 60.77
		 5,000 intensive programs of growth,
16.11, 19.2, 34.1, 60.34, 60.37
		 provisions, 20.1, 21.4, 48.1, 50.3
2016–2021, 16.1, 35.50, 39.6, 61.1–4

East Asia, 21.1
educational process, 2.6, 16.6, 16.16,
16.35, 20.8, 20.11–13, 20.16,
20.18, 21.9, 23.9, 24.6, 35.10,
35.23, 35.44, 35.48, 50.3, 50.5,

425

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
		 5,000 intensive programs of growth,
34.1, 35.2, 35.19, 35.48, 39.4,
61.1, 61.67
		 provisions, 35.17, 36.3
		 third milestone, 16.12–16,
35.22–33, 61.1, 61.46
focus, 1.2–3, 6.5, 8.2, 14.5, 14.18,
16.18, 16.39, 18.5, 20.1, 20.9,
20.14, 24.9, 26.5, 32.6, 35.11,
35.26, 35.39, 35.44, 36.2, 39.3,
39.5, 41.1–2, 43.1, 49.7, 50.12,
51.11, 52.5, 52.7, 54.3, 54.5,
54.7, 57.1–2, 57.4, 59.7, 59.24,
59.26–27, 59.36, 59.56–57,
60.52, 60.57, 60.61, 60.63, 60.78,
61.2, 61.22, 61.58, 61.88
clusters receiving focused attention,
1.28, 1.30, 19.4, 56.7, 60.20,
60.23, 60.56
of expansion phase, 24.4, 35.15,
60.3–4, 60.8, 60.65
on single aim, 2.4, 6.2, 35.2
sustaining, 1.16–17, 10.2, 24.6, 41.3,
59.55
Formative Age, 1.3, 2.4, 3.3, 8.1, 8.9,
10.2, 16.1, 18.2, 21.4, 22.3, 35.3,
35.20, 37.3–4, 55.6
fifth epoch, 4.9, 21.8
first century, 35.51, 36.2
Four Year Plan, 2.2, 6.4, 16.12, 49.2
central feature, 6.2
framework for action, 1.1, 2.4, 6.1,
12.1, 16.24, 26.5, 27.2, 30.3,
45.11, 48.1, 51.9, 55.6, 60.7,
60.21, 60.60, 60.68
fund, 1.12, 5.1, 16.21, 35.42, 35.45–47,
39.3, 45.6, 45.11, 55.3, 56.9,
59.42, 59.63
coordinators and institute staff, 46.3,
61.90–95
flow of funds, 16.7, 20.11, 60.72–73
for development, 47.5, 59.33,
59.41–42, 59.59, 59.63
Regional Bahá’í Councils, 16.18, 46.5,
60.79
Temples Fund, 21.10, 24.10, 32.3
for Youth Conferences, 28.4. See also
H
. uqúqu’lláh

gender, 5.7, 16.34, 23.9, 51.7
generation and application of
knowledge, 42.7, 54.6, 59.15,
59.48
girls, 7.5, 24.6, 32.7, 60.20, 60.29,
61.72
growth. See community: growth of;
institutions, development of:
administering growth; program
of growth; teaching: large-scale
growth
Hands of the Cause of God, 8.1–10,
9.10–12, 9.23, 9.25–27
home visits, 1.11, 1.24, 21.9–10, 35.11,
35.27, 43.4, 49.5, 57.4, 60.14,
60.53, 61.79
House of Worship, 21.1–11, 24.10, 28.3,
32.1–10, 33.1, 34.6, 35.49, 57.4
Chile, 4.10, 32.1, 32.5
‘Ishqábád, 32.7–10
local, 21.9–10, 24.10, 30.3, 32.2, 57.4
		Battambang, 21.9
		 Bihar Sharif, 21.9
		 Matunda Soy, 21.9
		 Norte del Cauca, 21.9
		 Tanna, 21.9, 30.3, 33.1
Mother Temple of the West, 21.1–2,
38.2
national, 21.8, 21.10, 24.10, 32.2
		 Democratic Republic of the Congo,
21.8
		 Papua New Guinea, 21.8, 33.1. See
also fund: Temples Fund
H
. uqúqu’lláh, 4.8, 8.9, 9.25, 59.41–42
individual, 1.2–4, 1.9–11, 1.13, 1.15,
1.17, 1.21, 1.30, 5.1, 5.7, 9.11,
10.2, 60.50, 61.73
and collective actions, 4.2, 4.9, 10.2,
14.5, 16.41, 60.50, 60.54, 60.60,
60.78, 60.80, 61.11–16, 61.20,
61.27–28, 61.36, 61.38, 61.63,
61.87
consciousness, 1.6, 5.6, 14.27, 16.16,
16.21, 16.34, 21.6

426

Index
initiative, 1.6–7, 1.17, 6.3, 10.3–4,
39.3, 49.3, 58.3, 60.56, 60.61,
61.15–16
power of self-expression, 21.6, 23.12,
61.13, 61.17, 61.47
supporting plans of institutions, 12.1,
14.5, 14.8–9, 23.12, 61.19, 61.66.
See also teaching: individual

		 and Regional Bahá’í Councils,
35.41, 46.2–3, 46.6, 50.3–4,
50.10, 53.4, 56.3, 60.72
		 and training institute board, 2.2–3,
2.7, 60.72, 60.75
“The Institution of the Counsellors”,
9.25
International Teaching Centre, 1.12,
3.3, 4.8, 8.7, 11.5, 14.15, 14.24,
16.17, 19.3, 20.10, 35.47, 36.2,
37.1, 50.10, 56.2, 57.1
institutional capacity, 1.2, 1.19, 1.31,
6.2, 35.40, 35.45, 53.1, 59.29,
59.37
at the cluster or local level, 1.18–19,
2.7, 14.15, 14.21, 16.18–19,
20.12, 20.16–17, 35.12,
35.28–29, 35.44, 43.4, 46.2, 47.4,
53.2–3, 56.5, 56.9, 59.25–26,
60.69, 60.77, 61.3
at the regional level, 14.23, 16.18,
20.11, 35.48, 56.5, 60.71, 60.78
of training institutes (see training
institutes: institutional capacity)
institutions, development of
administering growth, 1.18, 1.20,
1.29, 4.8, 16.14, 16.27, 23.10,
24.3, 27.4, 35.42, 56.4–5
approach standards in the teachings,
16.32, 21.7, 52.1–10, 59.37
flows of support, 1.29, 10.2, 16.4–8,
16.18, 16.30, 20.11–12, 35.23,
35.29, 53.3–4, 59.39–40,
59.43–44, 59.52, 60.72, 60.79,
61.41, 61.84
new stage in exercise of responsibilities, 14.22
use talents of believers, 1.6, 4.10,
14.29, 16.23, 20.21, 44.2, 59.39,
60.3, 60.84
integration and disintegration, 4.4,
4.6–7, 4.11, 10.6, 14.29, 18.3,
23.4, 34.3, 59.47. See also under
society
intensive program of growth, 1.22, 14.8,
14.14, 24.6, 61.52–58, 61.67–75
pattern of sustaining dual processes
of expansion and consolidation,

Institution of the Counsellors
Auxiliary Board, 1.13, 1.16, 1.18,
1.31, 4.8, 14.21, 14.24, 16.1,
16.5, 16.7–8, 16.17, 16.19,
16.21, 16.31–32, 16.35, 16.40,
20.11, 35.6, 35.12, 35.17, 35.39,
35.44, 35.47–48, 45.13, 46.2,
50.3, 50.10, 52.7, 56.3, 56.7,
60.52, 60.54, 60.72, 60.75, 60.78,
61.46, 61.48–49, 61.60, 61.64,
61.84–85, 61.88, 61.93
		 assistants, 16.5, 16.19, 16.21,
16.32, 16.35, 20.11, 35.6,
35.47–48, 56.7, 60.3, 60.39,
60.52, 60.54, 61.46, 61.48, 61.81
		 community development, 16.21,
60.75
		 functioning of the, 1.13, 1.18,
14.21, 16.5, 16.7–8, 16.19, 16.21,
16.32, 16.35, 20.11, 35.6, 35.12,
35.44, 35.48, 45.13, 52.7, 56.3,
56.7, 60.52, 60.54, 60.78
		 gathering in the Holy Land, 14.24
Counsellors, 4.2, 4.8, 8.7, 14.15,
14.24, 16.1, 26.1, 35.47, 36.3,
53.4, 57.1
		 assembled in the Holy Land, 3.1,
4.2, 14.24, 16.1, 17.1, 26.1
		 consultation with National
Assemblies, 1.18, 2.1, 3.4, 14.23,
19.3, 24.7, 35.41, 45.13, 46.6,
50.10, 52.7, 52.10, 53.4, 56.3,
56.7, 56.9, 57.1, 60.72, 61.95,
61.97
		 Counsellors’ Conferences, 16.1,
17.2, 18.2, 19.1, 35.1, 36.1–3,
37.4, 39.2, 41.3, 48.1, 49.1, 56.2

427

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
1.2, 1.10, 1.15, 1.18, 1.22, 2.4,
3.2, 6.2–4, 14.1, 14.8–9, 14.21,
14.26, 14.32, 16.1, 16.4, 16.7,
16.9–10, 16.12, 16.14–15, 16.19,
16.38–40, 19.1, 20.1, 21.9, 24.7,
26.5, 28.3, 30.3, 34.1, 34.6, 35.2,
35.22, 35.27, 35.45, 40.1, 41.4,
43.3–4, 43.6, 46.1, 47.1–4, 49.4,
50.2, 50.10, 53.2, 54.3, 54.5,
54.8, 55.1, 55.4, 56.4, 57.3,
57.6, 59.12, 59.62, 60.6, 60.8,
60.25, 60.46, 60.48, 60.52, 60.55,
60.62 (see also expansion: and
consolidation)
		 consolidation phase, 1.24–25
		 expansion phase, 1.23–25, 24.4,
35.15, 60.7–8, 61.32, 61.61
level of participation, 16.15
pattern of action associated with an,
16.11, 16.20, 19.1, 35.19
propitious conditions for, 1.10, 1.21,
11.2, 16.9
teach within receptive populations,
14.6, 20.9, 35.35, 55.3, 60.63 (see
also youth: receptive)
reflection phase, 1.27
scheme of coordination for, 56.3,
60.22
International Bahá’í Council, 9.21, 9.23,
9.26–27
Internet, 43.5, 58.1–6
Iran, 4.5, 7.1–13, 9.1, 10.5, 14.13,
14.33, 23.1–20, 24.9, 33.1–8

groups, 2.4, 13.1, 14.12, 14.18, 14.21,
16.4, 16.16, 20.12, 20.16–17,
20.19, 30.3, 35.8, 35.23, 35.44,
49.5, 57.3–4, 60.13, 60.15,
60.27–28, 60.30, 60.32, 60.40,
60.42, 60.44, 60.52, 60.64, 60.66,
60.76, 61.23, 61.34–36, 61.50,
61.52, 61.55, 61.57, 61.59,
61.62–65, 61.66, 61.88, 61.95,
61.97
		 animators, 13.1, 14.21, 20.2, 20.5,
20.15, 20.21, 26.5, 35.23, 50.5,
60.3, 60.14–15, 60.29, 60.38,
60.40, 60.42, 60.44, 60.76, 61.36,
61.50, 61.54–55, 61.57, 61.59–63
		 and community-building process,
50.2, 55.3, 60.15, 60.57, 60.64,
61.54
		 coordinators, 16.6, 20.11, 60.52,
60.65, 60.74, 60.76, 61.19–21,
61.41, 61.46–50, 61.60,
61.63–65, 61.81–86, 61.88–96
parents or families of, 35.27, 60.13,
60.15, 60.40, 61.29, 61.52, 61.57,
61.59
spiritual empowerment program,
14.14, 14.16–17, 14.19, 14.31,
16.21, 20.2, 20.8, 20.12, 20.21,
21.9, 35.30, 35.32, 35.37, 35.44,
43.5, 50.2, 50.5, 50.9, 55.3,
57.1, 57.5, 59.8, 59.30, 60.11,
60.13, 60.15, 60.40, 60.42, 60.56,
60.65–66, 60.75, 61.4–5, 61.29,
61.48–65, 61.80–81, 61.84, 61.88
		 learning sites, 14.18, 20.12,
21.9, 57.1, 57.5, 60.13, 60.15,
60.75–76, 61.62, 61.65, 61.88
				resource person, 14.17,
60.75–76, 61.65. See also youth:
junior

joy, 1.5, 1.20, 1.27, 3.1, 12.1, 14.1,
14.3, 14.26, 15.3, 16.5, 16.14,
17.1–2, 18.2, 20.18, 21.5, 21.8,
23.15, 24.5, 25.1, 26.1, 29.7,
31.4, 32.2, 32.7, 32.10, 34.5,
34.40, 45.1, 51.7, 52.3, 55.7,
59.39, 59.63, 60.67
junior youth, 1.11, 1.18, 1.26, 1.31,
4.9, 6.4–5, 10.1, 14.5, 14.14,
14.16–17, 14.19, 14.27, 16.2,
16.21, 17.1, 20.17–18, 24.3, 27.4,
35.27, 35.32, 50.5, 50.9, 55.3,
59.1, 59.30, 60.11, 60.13, 60.15,
60.28, 60.40, 60.56

Latin America and the Caribbean, 4.10,
21.9, 24.10, 32.1, 32.3, 32.5,
32.8, 60.23
learning, 1.5, 1.13, 1.15, 1.18–19,
1.21, 1.31, 3.2, 3.4, 6.3, 8.5, 9.9,
10.3, 10.7, 14.12, 14.32, 16.6–7,
16.10–12, 16.17-18, 16.36, 18.2,

428

Index
19.1, 20.1, 20.3, 20.8, 24.4, 24.7,
24.9, 29.6, 30.5, 34.5, 40.1, 49.5,
56.2, 57.2, 58.1, 61.34
action and reflection, 30.4, 39.3, 48.3,
54.5, 55.2, 59.35, 59.54
active agents of, 14.11, 60.50, 61.15
advancement of, 1.25, 14.26, 16.31,
29.7
attitude of, 1.6, 10.3, 16.8, 39.3, 40.1,
45.7, 60.10, 60.68, 61.93
capacity, 35.2, 40.1, 41.4, 56.3, 57.1
collective, 55.4, 59.11, 59.24, 60.23,
60.62, 61.22, 61.28, 61.43
to consult, 16.22
culture of, 41.4, 48.2, 61.43
dissemination of, 14.18, 20.12, 21.9,
35.44, 46.2, 50.2, 59.8, 60.13,
60.75, 60.79, 61.88–89
documenting, 61.92
to embrace large numbers (see
teaching: embrace of large
numbers)
fear of failure, 51.10
in action, 16.18, 23.10, 24.3, 35.13,
35.23, 48.3, 54.5, 59.11, 59.50,
59.67, 61.12, 61.69
institutions of the Faith, 1.17–18,
1.20, 16.22, 35.41, 35.48, 37.5,
45.13, 56.6–7, 56.10, 60.79,
61.16 (see also institutional
capacity)
institutions of higher, 7.4, 7.6, 7.10,
33.6, 61.91
methodology of, 59.46, 61.88
mistakes, 40.2, 41.4, 51.8, 51.10,
55.4, 60.62
mode of, 14.19–21, 14.24, 16.1,
16.18, 23.10, 24.4, 35.29, 35.47,
50.4, 59.11, 60.74, 61.88
path of, 1.2, 1.18, 11.2, 11.4, 14.25,
30.5, 35.30, 50.7, 54.8, 60.66,
61.11, 61.38
process of, 1.31, 14.17, 16.2, 16.15,
16.18, 16.30, 20.12, 23.9–12,
23.17, 28.3, 35.44, 35.47,
43.3, 49.7, 50.12, 55.1–2, 58.4,
59.11–12, 59.24–27, 59.64, 60.9,
60.69, 61.2, 61.95, 61.97

teaching-learning experience,
20.14, 59.56, 61.18. See also
study, consultation, action and
reflection; systematization: of
learning
learning sites. See under junior youth
love, 4.4, 7.8, 11.4, 14.33, 15.3, 16.5,
16.35, 16.43, 17.1, 18.5, 21.6,
23.2, 23.13, 23.15, 23.18, 23.20,
26.5, 28.6, 29.5, 33.7, 35.29,
35.46, 37.3, 42.3, 45.1, 45.12,
52.5, 52.10, 55.5, 57.4, 60.67
all activity begins with love, 34.3
environment of, 14.33, 24.5, 26.1,
26.5, 49.5, 52.3–4
for God or Bahá’u’lláh, 14.33, 15.5,
16.31, 19.2, 24.12, 32.10, 33.7–8,
34.3, 34.5, 35.39, 35.49–50, 36.3,
37.3, 37.5, 51.8, 60.37, 60.84
Mashriqu’l-Adhkár. See House of
Worship
moral distinction, 10.8, 11.4, 12.1,
16.31–35, 22.2, 22.4, 23.15, 42.3,
49.7, 51.1–11, 52.1–5, 59.57,
61.61
movement
of clusters (see cluster: milestones;
program of growth; intensive
program of growth; program with
growth)
of individuals through the sequence of
courses of the institute, 1.2, 2.3,
16.4, 20.3, 20.8, 30.1, 35.8, 57.2,
60.14–15, 60.32, 60.49, 60.60,
61.3, 61.6, 61.23, 61.26, 61.36,
61.40, 61.77, 61.87
two movements, 1.18
of populations, 14.32, 20.19, 35.8,
58.5
milestones. See under cluster
national committees, 5.6
neighborhoods, 1.7, 1.20, 14.5–7,
14.14–15, 14.19, 14.29–30,
14.33, 16.4, 16.6, 16.18, 16.27,
17.2, 18.6, 19.4, 20.14, 20.19,
21.6, 23.11, 24.3, 24.6–7, 27.6,

429

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
30.4, 32.6, 34.1, 34.7, 35.17,
35.24, 35.35, 43.4, 45.4, 45.7,
49.5, 49.7, 50.1–2, 50.5, 50.7–8,
56.6–7, 56.9, 57.3–4, 59.24,
59.30, 60.3, 60.8, 60.19–24,
60.27–28, 60.35, 60.54,
60.56–58, 60.61, 60.65–66,
61.22, 61.27, 61.30, 61.50, 61.55,
61.59, 61.76
North America, 16.31, 32.8, 35.51,
37.2, 37.4, 38.2, 45.7, 54.2, 57.1,
57.6

60.39, 60.46, 60.61, 60.66,
61.1–3, 61.44, 61.50–58, 61.85
nascent, 61.8–9, 61.42, 61.46. See
also cluster: milestone; intensive
program of growth
protagonists, three, 16.41, 16.44,
23.12, 23.17, 24.5, 26.6, 28.4,
30.2, 35.40, 41.4, 59.31, 61.42.
See also individual: role of;
community: development of; and
institutions, development of
racial prejudice, 4.7, 10.8, 16.34, 42.3,
48.3, 49.1–8, 49.4–7, 51.7, 57.6,
59.65, 60.20. See also society:
forces of disintegration
read reality, 14.9, 14.29, 16.10, 24.3,
35.27, 35.42, 39.3, 54.7, 59.29,
59.49, 60.48, 61.13, 61.53, 61.87,
61.91
society, 59.46–49
receptive population, 1.15, 14.6, 19.4,
20.9, 27.6, 50.8, 50.10, 55.3,
60.15, 60.56–57, 60.65, 61.34
reflection gathering, 1.12, 1.27, 14.21,
16.7, 16.17, 20.9, 26.3, 26.5,
35.13, 35.29, 47.3, 49.5, 56.2,
57.4, 60.28–29, 60.54, 60.60,
60.72, 61.19, 61.21–22, 61.47,
61.49, 61.57, 61.60, 61.64, 61.75,
61.78–80, 61.84, 61.88, 61.90.
See also decentralization: of
reflection meeting; study, consultation, action and reflection;
learning
Regional Bahá’í Councils, 40.2, 50.13
and Area Teaching Committee, 1.18,
16.18, 50.3, 57.4, 60.78, 61.96
		 cluster development facilitator,
60.53
budget, 46.2–3
and coordinators (regional or
national), 61.49, 61.96
Counsellors, 1.28, 16.18–19, 35.11,
46.3, 46.6, 50.4, 50.10, 53.4,
60.78, 61.97 (see also under
Institution of the Counsellors)

opposition, 7.5, 7.11, 16.38
OSED (Office of Social and Economic
Development). See under social
and economic development
Pacific region, 1.11, 21.8–9, 30.3,
32.3, 32.8, 33.1, 47.1–2, 50.9,
60.28–29
participation in discourses of society,
14.27, 14.30, 20.5, 23.11, 24.9,
35.2, 35.30, 35.32, 39.4, 43.5–7,
49.4, 54.4–5, 55.3, 60.26
path of service, 1.8, 14.10, 16.8, 23.20,
49.6, 60.67, 61.13–14, 61.27,
61.40
politics, 23.2–3, 23.17–19, 42.2–3,
42.6–7
partisanship (strict avoidance of),
7.10, 16.23, 23.10, 23.18, 26.2,
42.2, 42.7–8
pioneers (homefront and international),
1.30, 16.4, 16.11, 19.1–4,
20.1, 28.3, 35.5, 35.40, 35.42,
60.38–40, 60.42, 60.56, 60.79,
61.9, 61.42, 61.46
program of growth, 1.10, 1.21–22,
1.27, 4.2, 11.2, 12.1, 14.6, 14.14,
14.18, 14.24, 16.4, 16.6, 16.9,
16.11, 16.15–16, 16.20, 16.38,
19.1, 20.9, 24.3–4, 24.6, 28.6,
30.1–3, 34.3, 35.2, 35.4, 35.6,
35.16, 35.19, 35.22, 39.4, 40.1,
55.3, 56.3, 57.4, 57.6, 60.8,
60.22, 60.31, 60.33, 60.35–37,

430

Index
establishment of, 14.23, 35.41, 46.2,
50.1
features of, 46.4, 50.12
fund, 46.5
and institute board, 61.97
and National Spiritual Assembly,
16.18–19, 35.12, 46.4, 50.11,
53.4, 57.1, 60.72
purpose, responsibilities, role, and
functions, 1.18, 1.28, 16.8, 16.18,
35.11–12, 35.41–43, 46.1–4,
50.2–4, 50.6, 50.12, 53.2–4, 57.4,
60.72, 60.75, 60.77–79
Ruhi Institute, 2.2–5, 14.9, 14.14, 20.3,
20.20, 61.46
courses, 1.5, 1.29, 2.2–7, 14.4, 14.12,
14.14, 14.16, 16.8, 20.2, 20.4–5,
20.8, 20.13, 20.16–17, 20.19,
35.2, 35.8, 35.14, 35.18, 57.2,
59.7, 60.14–15, 60.33, 60.40,
60.44, 60.60, 60.65, 61.4–6,
61.10–11, 61.13, 61.17–18,
61.21–29, 61.33–36, 61.38,
61.40–44, 61.47–49, 61.53,
61.59, 61.61, 61.71, 61.73, 61.75,
61.77–78, 61.84, 61.87–88, 61.94
International Advisory Board to the
Ruhi Institute, 20.20

16.25, 20.12, 20.17, 24.7, 43.4,
47.4, 59.5–6, 59.8–9, 59.26,
59.36–37, 60.13, 61.58
		 International Advisory Board to the
Office of Social and Economic
Development, 34.6
society, 10.1, 10.7, 11.2, 14.27–28,
14.32, 16.16, 16.24, 16.36–37,
16.40, 20.5, 20.18–19, 21.2–3,
21.8, 23.1, 23.18, 23.20, 24.7,
24.9, 28.3, 30.3, 32.6–7, 34.1,
34.5, 35.2, 35.16–17, 35.30,
35.32, 35.39, 35.50, 39.3, 40.2,
42.2, 42.4–5, 43.3, 43.5–6, 46.3,
49.4, 51.1, 51.6, 54.1, 54.4–5,
55.3, 59.12, 59.14–15, 59.37,
59.46–48, 60.3–4, 60.12, 60.15,
60.26, 60.38, 60.44, 60.65, 61.3
betterment of the world, 4.3, 4.9, 5.1,
6.4, 7.5, 10.6, 10.8, 13.1, 14.4,
14.6, 14.16, 14.19, 14.25–27,
14.30, 14.32, 16.12–14, 16.32,
16.34, 16.36, 17.1–2, 20.21, 21.2,
21.5–7, 22.1, 22.3–4, 23.1, 23.4,
23.6–13, 23.15–17, 24.1, 24.6,
24.8, 27.2, 27.5–7, 28.6, 29.3,
29.5–6, 33.7, 34.3–4, 35.23–24,
35.33, 35.35–36, 35.46, 37.5,
39.3, 42.3, 43.5, 44.3–4, 49.7–8,
50.2, 50.5–6, 51.2, 51.5, 51.8–10,
52.3, 52.5, 54.8, 57.1, 59.1,
59.18–19, 59.29, 59.41, 59.66–67,
60.20, 60.63, 60.66, 60.81, 60.83,
61.34, 61.53, 61.95
forces of disintegration, 1.32, 4.3–7,
5.1, 9.21, 10.6, 10.8, 11.4, 14.6,
14.10, 14.16, 14.26, 16.13, 16.32,
16.34, 16.36, 16.38, 16.40, 21.3,
21.6–7, 22.4, 23.4, 23.6, 24.6,
27.6, 34.2, 36.1, 38.3, 39.5, 42.5,
49.7, 51.1, 51.3–4, 51.7, 51.10,
52.5, 57.6, 58.6, 59.66, 60.20
South Asia, 9.20, 21.1, 21.9, 22.3, 32.3,
53.1–4, 60.12, 60.24
Southeast Asia, 21.9, 22.3, 32.3, 34.6,
46.1–2, 46.6, 60.23

spiritual forces, 1.32, 16.2–3, 16.8, 17.2,
21.2, 24.3, 28.4, 35.14, 35.24,
39.3, 60.68, 61.25
social action, 4.7, 14.17, 14.27–31,
15.3, 16.25, 20.5, 21.9, 24.7,
24.9, 34.6, 35.2, 35.30, 35.32,
37.5, 39.3, 42.8, 43.4, 43.6,
49.4–5, 54.4–5, 55.3, [subject of
#59 is ‘social action’] 59.1–65,
60.13, 60.26, 60.30, 60.82
social and economic development, 1.17,
4.9–10, 7.5, 14.17, 14.28–29,
16.25, 20.12, 20.17, 22.2, 24.7,
34.6, 39.3, 42.4, 43.4, 43.7,
47.1–2, 47.4, 59.2–6, 59.9–10,
59.17, 59.28, 59.34, 59.40, 59.42,
59.46, 59.50, 60.13, 60.30
Office of Social and Economic
Development (OSED), 14.17,

431

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
stage of development, 1.2, 1.9, 1.26, 6.3,
14.27, 16.3, 20.12, 30.1, 35.4. See
also cluster: milestones
study circles. See Ruhi Institute: courses;
training institutes: study circles
study, consultation, action and
reflection, 10.1, 14.32, 16.10,
16.24, 23.10, 24.9, 30.4, 34.5,
35.12, 35.15, 39.3, 48.3, 54.5,
55.2, 56.3, 59.11. See also
learning
systematization, 1.14, 4.2, 4.7, 14.14,
16.12, 16.34, 19.4, 20.16, 21.4,
24.9, 34.4, 35.38, 35.49, 35.54,
37.4, 38.3, 41.3, 49.2–4, 49.7,
54.5, 59.4, 59.6, 59.22, 59.40,
59.55, 60.35, 61.87
of action, 1.6, 1.14, 1.17–18, 6.4,
11.4, 14.13, 14.18, 15.5, 16.4,
16.35, 34.2, 35.7, 35.12, 35.17,
35.27, 35.52, 42.4, 43.2, 49.3–4,
50.1, 57.1–2, 59.54, 60.12, 60.45
of growth, 1.19, 1.29–30, 10.4, 11.1,
16.2, 16.6, 20.12, 54.3
of experience, 1.2, 1.25, 2.7,
14.26–27, 20.8, 20.14, 24.9,
35.10, 39.3, 50.6, 54.6, 57.2,
59.8, 59.26, 60.49, 61.4–5,
61.31–32, 61.53, 61.73
of knowledge, 34.6, 60.11
of learning, 1.21, 6.3, 10.4, 10.7,
20.10–11, 35.44, 43.3, 48.2, 49.7,
54.6, 57.4, 59.25, 59.55, 60.54,
60.75, 61.62, 61.86, 61.88
of study, 10.1, 11.4, 43.7
the teaching work, 1.14, 14.14, 16.12,
19.1, 35.25, 35.51, 40.2, 49.3,
57.2, 61.76
teaching, 1.5, 11.1, 60.24, 60.60, 61.3
approaches and methods, 1.23, 10.3,
14.4–5, 49.3, 55.2, 60.14, 61.23,
61.29
campaign, 60.3, 60.56, 61.44–45
children’s classes, 20.5, 20.14, 59.56
(see also children: children’s
classes)
collective endeavors, 1.10, 16.1, 60.61
confirmations, 1.5

in conversation, 61.24–34, 61.53
dominating passion for teaching, 1.8,
6.6, 14.2, 35.14, 35.48, 35.53,
57.4
dynamics of, 1.27
efforts, 1.24, 49.5, 60.53, 60.56
embrace of large numbers, 1.18, 1.25,
6.1, 14.13, 34.4, 35.2, 35.24–25,
35.33, 37.4, 60.21–22, 61.51,
61.59–65, 61.67, 61.76–80, 61.83
field, 14.24, 14.26, 16.31, 44.1, 44.3,
55.7, 60.3
firesides, 1.7, 1.24, 6.5, 35.15, 41.1,
57.4
indigenous peoples, 37.3, 39.3
individual, 1.7, 1.17, 2.6, 5.6, 6.5,
10.5, 14.3, 14.32, 44.1, 55.2,
57.4, 60.61
intensive teaching efforts, 24.4, 34.3,
60.8
joy of teaching, 1.5, 52.3
large-scale growth, 1.18, 46.2, 56.4
plan, 4.8, 35.27, 41.2, 60.61
purpose, 1.30
and study circles, 6.5, 61.13, 61.48
teams, 35.5, 60.39, 60.53, 60.57,
60.66
tempo of, 10.2, 14.3
traveling, 41.1
work, 16.8, 16.12, 35.51, 40.2, 45.11,
57.4, 60.29
training institutes, 1.2, 52.3, 61.1–97
boards, 2.2, 16.8, 20.2, 35.44, 46.3,
50.10, 60.71–72
children’s classes, 14.12, 14.14,
14.17–18, 16.6, 16.17, 16.29,
16.32, 20.2, 20.11, 20.14,
20.16–17, 35.10, 35.26, 35.44,
46.3, 53.2, 56.2–3, 56.5–6,
57.1–2, 59.56, 60.3, 60.12, 60.24,
60.42, 60.51–52, 60.54, 60.65,
60.71–74, 60.76, 60.78
community-building process, 61.11,
61.18, 61.97 (see also community:
training institute and the)
curriculum, 2.1–5, 2.7, 14.9, 20.3,
20.5, 54.8 (see also Ruhi Institute:
courses)

432

Index
educational process with three distinct
stages, 20.8, 24.3, 35.10, 35.44,
50.3, 54.8, 60.11, 60.15
funding, 50.11, 56.9 (see also fund:
coordinators and institute staff)
importance of training, 27.4, 35.25,
50.6, 57.3, 59.8, 60.49
institute campaigns, 1.24, 1.29, 6.5,
14.3, 16.38, 33.2, 35.28, 60.3,
60.14–15, 60.56, 60.61, 60.65
institute process, 1.5, 1.8, 1.21, 1.24,
1.29, 2.7, 6.3, 10.3, 12.1, 14.7,
14.32, 16.7, 16.9, 16.16, 16.25,
20.2, 20.15, 24.7, 35.5, 35.8,
35.11, 35.14, 35.16, 35.23, 43.2,
43.7, 44.2–4, 47.3, 54.8, 57.2,
59.9, 60.14, 60.19, 60.29, 60.35,
60.39, 60.41, 60.49, 60.53, 60.60,
60.67
institutional capacity, 1.2, 1.31, 6.2,
16.19, 35.29, 35.45, 53.1, 59.29,
61.5, 61.61, 61.85–97
institutional arrangements, 54.5, 55.3,
59.11, 59.40
		 assistants, 16.17, 56.2, 56.5
		 coordinators, 14.12, 14.14,
14.17–18, 16.6, 16.17, 16.29,
16.32, 20.2, 20.11, 20.16–17,
35.10, 35.26, 35.44, 46.3, 53.2,
56.2–3, 56.5–6, 57.1–2, 60.3,
60.12, 60.24, 60.42, 60.51–52,
60.54, 60.65, 60.71–74, 60.76,
60.78
		 institute boards, 2.2–3, 2.7, 60.72,
60.75, 61.93
mobilization, 1.24, 20.2, 35.11, 57.4
resource persons for the institute
14.17, 60.75–76, 61.65
staff, 60.78–79, 61.86, 61.92,
61.95–97
study circles, 1.5, 1.7–8, 1.10, 1.24,
1.31, 14.7, 14.9, 14.11–12, 16.2,
16.4, 16.6, 16.37, 17.1, 20.2,
20.11–12, 21.9, 35.44, 49.5, 52.8,
57.4, 60.3, 60.11, 60.14–15,
60.29, 60.38, 60.40, 60.42, 60.44,
60.49 (see also Ruhi Institute:

courses; teaching; training institutes: institute process)
tutors, 1.8, 14.7, 14.9, 14.11–12,
14.21, 16.2, 17.1, 20.2, 20.13,
24.3, 26.5, 35.5, 35.8, 35.10,
35.23, 35.26, 52.8, 57.2, 60.3,
60.11–12, 60.14–15, 60.29,
60.38, 60.49, 60.51, 60.54, 60.72,
61.6–22, 61.36, 61.41–49, 61.53,
61.59, 61.71, 61.84. See also
development of human resources
Twelve Month Plan, 6.4
two movements, 1.18, 30.1. See also
under cluster
unity of vision, thought and action,
23.10, 61.25, 61.57, 61.91
universal participation, 6.4, 14.6, 14.29,
16.8, 20.2, 59.23, 60.9, 60.19
Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. See
under ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
women, 7.11, 14.5, 14.12, 16.15, 17.2,
23.6, 23.9–10, 24.2, 24.6, 26.1,
35.31, 35.39, 42.6, 43.5, 47.3,
52.1, 59.16, 59.30, 59.65, 60.20,
60.29, 60.58, 61.22, 61.43. See
also gender; girls
Word of God, 1.5, 1.8, 10.7, 14.22,
16.16, 22.1, 24.2, 24.12, 35.14,
35.23, 39.5, 52.3, 61.17, 61.27
Yerrinbool (Bahá’í Centre of Learning),
43.1, 43.7–8
young people. See children; junior
youth; youth
youth, 4.4, 7.6, 14.27, 16.16, 16.33,
17.2, 20.8, 22.2–4, 23.10,
24.2–3, 24.6, 24.11, 25.1–2, 27.1,
27.3–5, 27.6, 28.4, 28.6, 29.1–2,
32.7, 34.1, 34.3, 34.5, 35.2,
35.5, 35.14, 35.23–24, 35.31,
35.34–35, 35.38–39, 37.3, 37.5,
42.4, 47.3, 51.1–2, 51.7, 51.10,
52.1–3, 52.5, 54.1, 57.1–3, 58.5,
59.1, 60.27, 60.29, 60.42–44,
60.55–56, 60.58, 60.65, 60.74,
61.22, 61.34

433

FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION
capacity of, 20.21, 35.34, 35.36,
35.38, 57.3
and cluster, 35.8, 57.2
conferences, 13.1–2, 22.1–4, 24.11,
25.1–2, 27.1–8, 28.3–4, 29.1,
29.3, 30.1, 35.34, 35.40, 54.8,
57.1–2
(spiritual) educational process, 1.26,
4.9, 10.1, 11.4, 13.1, 20.21, 28.3,
35.2, 35.32, 51.10, 57.2, 60.11,
60.15, 60.20, 60.42, 60.44, 60.65,
61.25, 61.43, 61.77
enthusiasm, 13.1, 16.33
in the Cradle of the Faith, 29, 33.5–6
junior, 6.4–5, 10.1, 14.5, 14.16, 14.27,
16.2, 17.1, 20.18, 24.3, 27.4,
35.27, 59.1, 60.11, 60.15, 60.28,
60.56, 61.29, 61.34, 61.72 (see
also junior youth)

mutual support through fellowship,
30.3, 35.37, 60.3
receptive, 60.55, 60.63, 60.65–66,
61.72
and service, 14.20, 18.4, 21.5, 24.6,
27.2, 27.4, 30.1, 30.3, 35.35–39,
39.3, 50.5, 57.1, 57.3, 60.14–15,
60.20, 60.30, 60.38, 60.42, 60.44,
60.55–56, 60.63, 60.74, 61.23,
61.72, 61.77
young people (junior youth and
youth) have vast reservoirs of
energy, 1.26, 20.21, 61.36
special gatherings of or for, 35.35,
35.37–38, 57.2, 60.65

434

